{+item  category  or  individual  item  details  how  an  item   is  activated.  Certain  items  use  the  following  rules  for   their  activation.      If  an  item  requires  an  action  to  activate,  that   action  isn't  a  function  of  the  Use  an  Item  action,  so  a   feature  such  as  the  rogue's  Fast  Hands  can't  be  used   to  activate  the  item.  
Command Word
A  command  word  is  a  word  or  phrase  that  must  be   spoken  for  an  item  to  work.  A  magic  item  that   requires  a  command  word  can't  be  activated  in  an   area  where  sound  is  prevented,  as  in  the  area  of  the   silence  spell.  
Consumables
Some  items  are  used  up  when  they  are  activated.  A   potion  or  an  elixir  must  be  swallowed,  or  an  oil   applied  to  the  body.  The  writing  vanishes  from  a   scroll  when  it  is  read.  Once  used,  a  consumable  item   loses  its  magic.  
Spells
Some  magic  items  allow  the  user  to  cast  a  spell  from   the  item.  The  spell  is  cast  at  the  lowest  possible  spell   level,  doesn't  expend  any  of  the  user's  spell  slots,  and   requires  no  components,  unless  the  item's   description  says  otherwise.  The  spell  uses  its  normal   casting  time,  range,  and  duration,  and  the  user  of  the   item  must  concentrate  if  the  spell  requires   concentration.  Many  items,  such  as  potions,  bypass   the  casting  of  a  spell  and  confer  the  spell's  effects,   with  their  usual  duration.  Certain  items  make   exceptions  to  these  rules,  changing  the  casting  time,   duration,  or  other  parts  of  a  spell.      A  magic  item,  such  as  certain  staffs,  may  require   you  to  use  your  own  spellcasting  ability  when  you   cast  a  spell  from  the  item.  If  you  have  more  than  one   spellcasting  ability,  you  choose  which  one  to  use   with  the  item.  If  you  don't  have  a  spellcasting   ability--perhaps  you're  a  rogue  with  the  Use  Magic   Device  feature--your  spellcasting  ability  modifier  is   +0  for  the  item,  and  your  proficiency  bonus  does   apply.  
Charges
Some  magic  items  have  charges  that  must  be   expended  to  activate  their  properties.  The  number  of   charges  an  item  has  remaining  is  revealed  when  an   identify  spell  is  cast  on  it,  as  well  as  when  a  creature   attunes  to  it.  Additionally,  when  an  item  regains  

charges,  the  creature  attuned  to  it  learns  how  many   charges  it  regained.+}  
Magic Items {+A-Z+}
   Magic  items  are  presented  in  alphabetical  order.  A   magic  item's  description  gives  the  item's  name,  its   category,  its  rarity,  and  its  magical  properties.  
Adamantine Armor
Armor  (medium  or  heavy,  but  not  hide),  uncommon  
This  suit  of  armor  is  reinforced  with  adamantine,   one  of  the  hardest  substances  in  existence.  While   you're  wearing  it,  any  critical  hit  against  you   becomes  a  normal  hit.  
Ammunition, +1, +2, or +3
Weapon  (any  ammunition),  uncommon  (+1),  rare   (+2),  or  very  rare  (+3)  
You  have  a  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls  made   with  this  piece  of  magic  ammunition.  The  bonus  is   determined  by  the  rarity  of  the  ammunition.  Once  it   hits  a  target,  the  ammunition  is  no  longer  magical.  
Amulet of Health
Wondrous  item,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
Your  Constitution  score  is  19  while  you  wear  this   amulet.  It  has  no  effect  on  you  if  your  Constitution  is   already  19  or  higher.  
Amulet of Proof against Detection and Location
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  this  amulet,  you  are  hidden  from   divination  magic.  You  can't  be  targeted  by  such   magic  or  perceived  through  magical  scrying  sensors.  
Amulet of the Planes
Wondrous  item,  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  this  amulet,  you  can  use  an  action  to   name  a  location  that  you  are  familiar  with  on   another  plane  of  existence.  Then  make  a  DC  15   Intelligence  check.  On  a  successful  check,  you  cast   the  plane  shift  spell.  On  a  failure,  you  and  each   creature  and  object  within  15  feet  of  you  travel  to  a   random  destination.  Roll  a  d100.  On  a  1­60,  you   travel  to  a  random  location  on  the  plane  you  named.   On  a  61­100,  you  travel  to  a  randomly  determined   plane  of  existence.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

207+}  

Animated Shield
Armor  (shield),  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  
While  holding  this  shield,  you  can  speak  its   command  word  as  a  bonus  action  to  cause  it  to   animate.  The  shield  leaps  into  the  air  and  hovers  in   your  space  to  protect  you  as  if  you  were  wielding  it,   leaving  your  hands  free.  The  shield  remains   animated  for  1  minute,  until  you  use  a  bonus  action   to  end  this  effect,  or  until  you  are  incapacitated  or   die,  at  which  point  the  shield  falls  to  the  ground  or   into  your  hand  if  you  have  one  free.  

Apparatus of the Crab
Wondrous  item,  legendary  

This  item  first  appears  to  be  a  Large  sealed  iron   barrel  weighing  500  pounds.  The  barrel  has  a  hidden   catch,  which  can  be  found  with  a  successful  DC  20   Intelligence  (Investigation)  check.  Releasing  the   catch  unlocks  a  hatch  at  one  end  of  the  barrel,   allowing  two  Medium  or  smaller  creatures  to  crawl   inside.  Ten  levers  are  set  in  a  row  at  the  far  end,  each   in  a  neutral  position,  able  to  move  either  up  or  down.   When  certain  levers  are  used,  the  apparatus   transforms  to  resemble  a  giant  lobster.      The  apparatus  of  the  Crab  is  a  Large  object  with   the  following  statistics:  

Armor  Class:  20   Hit  Points:  200   Speed:  30  ft.,  swim  30  ft.  (or  0  ft.  for  both  if  the  legs  
and  tail  aren't  extended)   Damage  Immunities:  poison,  psychic  

To  be  used  as  a  vehicle,  the  apparatus  requires  one   pilot.  While  the  apparatus's  hatch  is  closed,  the   compartment  is  airtight  and  watertight.  The   compartment  holds  enough  air  for  10  hours  of   breathing,  divided  by  the  number  of  breathing   creatures  inside.      The  apparatus  floats  on  water.  It  can  also  go   underwater  to  a  depth  of  900  feet.  Below  that,  the   vehicle  takes  2d6  bludgeoning  damage  per  minute   from  pressure.      A  creature  in  the  compartment  can  use  an  action   to  move  as  many  as  two  of  the  apparatus's  levers  up   or  down.  After  each  use,  a  lever  goes  back  to  its   neutral  position.  Each  lever,  from  left  to  right,   functions  as  shown  in  the  Apparatus  of  the  Crab   Levers  table.  

Apparatus  of  the  Crab  Levers  

Lever   Up   1   Legs  and  tail  extend,  

Down   Legs  and  tail  retract,  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

211-]  

allowing  the  apparatus   reducing  the  apparatus's  

to  walk  and  swim.  

speed  to  0  and  making  it  

unable  to  benefit  from  

bonuses  to  speed.  

2   Forward  window  shutter   Forward  window  shutter  

opens.  

closes.  

3   Side  window  shutters   Side  window  shutters  

open  (two  per  side).  

close  (two  per  side).  

4   Two  claws  extend  from   The  claws  retract.  

the  front  sides  of  the  

apparatus.  

5   Each  extended  claw  

Each  extended  claw  

makes  the  following  

makes  the  following  

melee  weapon  attack:   melee  weapon  attack:  +8  

+8  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one  

target.  Hit:  7  (2d6)  

target.  Hit:  The  target  is  

bludgeoning  damage.   grappled  (escape  DC  15).  

6   The  apparatus  walks  or   The  apparatus  walks  or  

swims  forward.  

swims  backward.  

7   The  apparatus  turns  90   The  apparatus  turns  90  

degrees  left.  

degrees  right.  

8   Eyelike  fixtures  emit  

The  light  turns  off.  

bright  light  in  a  30-foot  

radius  and  dim  light  for  

an  additional  30  feet.  

9   The  apparatus  sinks  as   The  apparatus  rises  up  

much  as  20  feet  in  

to  20  feet  in  liquid.  

liquid.  

10   The  rear  hatch  unseals   The  rear  hatch  closes  

and  opens.  

and  seals.  

Armor, +1, +2, or +3
Armor  (light,  medium,  or  heavy),  rare  (+1),  very  rare   (+2),  or  legendary  (+3)  
You  have  a  bonus  to  AC  while  wearing  this  armor.   The  bonus  is  determined  by  its  rarity.  

Armor of Invulnerability
Armor  (plate),  legendary  (requires  attunement)  
You  have  resistance  to  nonmagical  damage  while   you  wear  this  armor.  Additionally,  you  can  use  an   action  to  make  yourself  immune  to  nonmagical   damage  for  10  minutes  or  until  you  are  no  longer   wearing  the  armor.  Once  this  special  action  is  used,   it  can't  be  used  again  until  the  next  dawn.  

Armor of Resistance
Armor  (light,  medium,  or  heavy),  rare  (requires   attunement)  
You  have  resistance  to  one  type  of  damage  while  you   wear  this  armor.  The  GM  chooses  the  type  or   determines  it  randomly  from  the  options  below.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

208+}  

d10   Damage  Type      d10   Damage  Type  

1   Acid  

   6   Necrotic  

2   Cold  

   7   Poison  

3   Fire  

   8   Psychic  

4   Force  

   9   Radiant  

5   Lightning  

   10   Thunder  

Armor of Vulnerability
Armor  (plate),  rare  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  this  armor,  you  have  resistance  to   one  of  the  following  damage  types:  bludgeoning,   piercing,  or  slashing.  The  GM  chooses  the  type  or   determines  it  randomly.      Curse.  This  armor  is  cursed,  a  fact  that  is  revealed   only  when  an  identify  spell  is  cast  on  the  armor  or   you  attune  to  it.  Attuning  to  the  armor  curses  you   until  you  are  targeted  by  the  remove  curse  spell  or   similar  magic;  removing  the  armor  fails  to  end  the   curse.  While  cursed,  you  have  vulnerability  to  two  of   the  three  damage  types  associated  with  the  armor   (not  the  one  to  which  it  grants  resistance).  

Arrow-Catching Shield
Armor  (shield),  rare  (requires  attunement)  
You  gain  a  +2  bonus  to  AC  against  ranged  attacks   while  you  wield  this  shield.  This  bonus  is  in  addition   to  the  shield's  normal  bonus  to  AC.  In  addition,   whenever  an  attacker  makes  a  ranged  attack  against   a  target  within  5  feet  of  you,  you  can  use  your   reaction  to  become  the  target  of  the  attack  instead.  

Arrow of Slaying
Weapon  (arrow),  very  rare  
An  arrow  of  slaying  is  a  magic  weapon  meant  to  slay   a  particular  kind  of  creature.  Some  are  more  focused   than  others;  for  example,  there  are  both  arrows  of   dragon  slaying  and  arrows  of  blue  dragon  slaying.  If  a   creature  belonging  to  the  type,  race,  or  group   associated  with  an  arrow  of  slaying  takes  damage   from  the  arrow,  the  creature  must  make  a  DC  17   Constitution  saving  throw,  taking  an  extra  6d10   piercing  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   extra  damage  on  a  successful  one.      Once  an  arrow  of  slaying  deals  its  extra  damage  to   a  creature,  it  becomes  a  nonmagical  arrow.      Other  types  of  magic  ammunition  of  this  kind  exist,   such  as  bolts  of  slaying  meant  for  a  crossbow,  though   arrows  are  most  common.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

212-]  

Bag of Beans
Wondrous  item,  rare  

Inside  this  heavy  cloth  bag  are  3d4  dry  beans.  The   bag  weighs  1/2  pound  plus  1/4  pound  for  each  bean   it  contains.      If  you  dump  the  bag's  contents  out  on  the  ground,   they  explode  in  a  10-foot  radius,  extending  from  the   beans.  Each  creature  in  the  area,  including  you,  must   make  a  DC  15  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  5d4  fire   damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on   a  successful  one.  The  fire  ignites  flammable  objects   in  the  area  that  aren't  being  worn  or  carried.      If  you  remove  a  bean  from  the  bag,  plant  it  in  dirt   or  sand,  and  then  water  it,  the  bean  produces  an   effect  1  minute  later  from  the  ground  where  it  was   planted.  The  GM  can  choose  an  effect  from  the   following  table,  determine  it  randomly,  or  create  an   effect.  

d100   01  
02­10   11­20   21­30  
31­40   41­50   51­60  
61­70   71­80  
81­90  

Effect   5d4  toadstools  sprout.  If  a  creature  eats  a   toadstool,  roll  any  die.  On  an  odd  roll,  the  eater   must  succeed  on  a  DC  15  Constitution  saving   throw  or  take  5d6  poison  damage  and  become   poisoned  for  1  hour.  On  an  even  roll,  the  eater   gains  5d6  temporary  hit  points  for  1  hour.   A  geyser  erupts  and  spouts  water,  beer,  berry   juice,  tea,  vinegar,  wine,  or  oil  (GM's  choice)  30   feet  into  the  air  for  1d12  rounds.   A  treant  sprouts.  There's  a  50  percent  chance   that  the  treant  is  chaotic  evil  and  attacks.   An  animate,  immobile  stone  statue  in  your   likeness  rises.  It  makes  verbal  threats  against   you.  If  you  leave  it  and  others  come  near,  it   describes  you  as  the  most  heinous  of  villains  and   directs  the  newcomers  to  find  and  attack  you.  If   you  are  on  the  same  plane  of  existence  as  the   statue,  it  knows  where  you  are.  The  statue   becomes  inanimate  after  24  hours.   A  campfire  with  blue  flames  springs  forth  and   burns  for  24  hours  (or  until  it  is  extinguished).   1d6  +  6  shriekers  sprout   1d4  +  8  bright  pink  toads  crawl  forth.  Whenever   a  toad  is  touched,  it  transforms  into  a  Large  or   smaller  monster  of  the  GM's  choice.  The   monster  remains  for  1  minute,  then  disappears   in  a  puff  of  bright  pink  smoke.   A  hungry  bulette  burrows  up  and  attacks.   A  fruit  tree  grows.  It  has  1d10  +  20  fruit,  1d8  of   which  act  as  randomly  determined  magic   potions,  while  one  acts  as  an  ingested  poison  of   the  GM's  choice.  The  tree  vanishes  after  1  hour.   Picked  fruit  remains,  retaining  any  magic  for  30   days.   A  nest  of  1d4  +  3  eggs  springs  up.  Any  creature  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

209+}  

91­99   00  

that  eats  an  egg  must  make  a  DC  20  Constitution   saving  throw.  On  a  successful  save,  a  creature   permanently  increases  its  lowest  ability  score  by   1,  randomly  choosing  among  equally  low  scores.   On  a  failed  save,  the  creature  takes  10d6  force   damage  from  an  internal  magical  explosion.   A  pyramid  with  a  60-foot-square  base  bursts   upward.  Inside  is  a  sarcophagus  containing  a   mummy  lord.  The  pyramid  is  treated  as  the   mummy  lord's  lair,  and  its  sarcophagus  contains   treasure  of  the  GM's  choice.   A  giant  beanstalk  sprouts,  growing  to  a  height  of   the  GM's  choice.  The  top  leads  where  the  GM   chooses,  such  as  to  a  great  view,  a  cloud  giant's   castle,  or  a  different  plane  of  existence.  

Bag of Devouring
Wondrous  item,  very  rare  
This  bag  superficially  resembles  a  bag  of  holding  but   is  a  feeding  orifice  for  a  gigantic  extradimensional   creature.  Turning  the  bag  inside  out  closes  the   orifice.      The  extradimensional  creature  attached  to  the  bag   can  sense  whatever  is  placed  inside  the  bag.  Animal   or  vegetable  matter  placed  wholly  in  the  bag  is   devoured  and  lost  forever.  When  part  of  a  living   creature  is  placed  in  the  bag,  as  happens  when   someone  reaches  inside  it,  there  is  a  50  percent   chance  that  the  creature  is  pulled  inside  the  bag.  A   creature  inside  the  bag  can  use  its  action  to  try  to   escape  with  a  successful  DC  15  Strength  check.   Another  creature  can  use  its  action  to  reach  into  the   bag  to  pull  a  creature  out,  doing  so  with  a  successful   DC  20  Strength  check  (provided  it  isn't  pulled  inside   the  bag  first).  Any  creature  that  starts  its  turn  inside   the  bag  is  devoured,  its  body  destroyed.      Inanimate  objects  can  be  stored  in  the  bag,  which   can  hold  a  cubic  foot  of  such  material.  However,  once   each  day,  the  bag  swallows  any  objects  inside  it  and   spits  them  out  into  another  plane  of  existence.  The   GM  determines  the  time  and  plane.      If  the  bag  is  pierced  or  torn,  it  is  destroyed,  and   anything  contained  within  it  is  transported  to  a   random  location  on  the  Astral  Plane.  

Bag of Holding
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
This  bag  has  an  interior  space  considerably  larger   than  its  outside  dimensions,  roughly  2  feet  in   diameter  at  the  mouth  and  4  feet  deep.  The  bag  can   hold  up  to  500  pounds,  not  exceeding  a  volume  of  64   cubic  feet.  The  bag  weighs  15  pounds,  regardless  of  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

213-]  

its  contents.  Retrieving  an  item  from  the  bag   requires  an  action.      If  the  bag  is  overloaded,  pierced,  or  torn,  it   ruptures  and  is  destroyed,  and  its  contents  are   scattered  in  the  Astral  Plane.  If  the  bag  is  turned   inside  out,  its  contents  spill  forth,  unharmed,  but  the   bag  must  be  put  right  before  it  can  be  used  again.   Breathing  creatures  inside  the  bag  can  survive  up  to   a  number  of  minutes  equal  to  10  divided  by  the   number  of  creatures  (minimum  1  minute),  after   which  time  they  begin  to  suffocate.      Placing  a  bag  of  holding  inside  an   extradimensional  space  created  by  a  handy   haversack,  portable  hole,  or  similar  item  instantly   destroys  both  items  and  opens  a  gate  to  the  Astral   Plane.  The  gate  originates  where  the  one  item  was   placed  inside  the  other.  Any  creature  within  10  feet   of  the  gate  is  sucked  through  it  to  a  random  location   on  the  Astral  Plane.  The  gate  then  closes.  The  gate  is   one-way  only  and  can't  be  reopened.  
Bag of Tricks
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
This  ordinary  bag,  made  from  gray,  rust,  or  tan  cloth,   appears  empty.  Reaching  inside  the  bag,  however,   reveals  the  presence  of  a  small,  fuzzy  object.  The  bag   weighs  1/2  pound.      You  can  use  an  action  to  pull  the  fuzzy  object  from   the  bag  and  throw  it  up  to  20  feet.  When  the  object   lands,  it  transforms  into  a  creature  you  determine  by   rolling  a  d8  and  consulting  the  table  that   corresponds  to  the  bag's  color.  The  creature   {+vanishes  at  the  next  dawn  or  when  it  is  reduced  to  0   hit  points.      The  creature+}  is  friendly  to  you  and  your   companions,  and  it  acts  on  your  turn.  You  can  use  a   bonus  action  to  command  how  the  creature  moves   and  what  action  it  takes  on  its  next  turn,  or  to  give  it   general  orders,  such  as  to  attack  your  enemies.  In   the  absence  of  such  orders,  the  creature  acts  in  a   fashion  appropriate  to  its  nature.      Once  three  fuzzy  objects  have  been  pulled  from   the  bag,  the  bag  can't  be  used  again  until  the  next   dawn.  
Gray  Bag  of  Tricks  
d8   Creature   1   Weasel   2   Giant  rat   3   Badger   4   Boar   5   Panther  
6   Giant  badger  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

210+}  

7   Dire  wolf   8   Giant  elk     
Rust  Bag  of  Tricks  
d8   Creature   1   Rat   2   Owl   3   Mastiff   4   Goat   5   Giant  goat   6   Giant  boar   7   Lion   8   Brown  bear     
Tan  Bag  of  Tricks  
d8   Creature   1   Jackal   2   Ape   3   Baboon   4   Axe  beak   5   Black  bear   6   Giant  weasel   7   Giant  hyena   8   Tiger  
Bead of Force
Wondrous  item,  rare  
This  small  black  sphere  measures  3/4  of  an  inch  in   diameter  and  weighs  an  ounce.  Typically,  1d4  +  4   beads  of  force  are  found  together.      You  can  use  an  action  to  throw  the  bead  up  to  60   feet.  The  bead  explodes  on  impact  and  is  destroyed.   Each  creature  within  a  10-foot  radius  of  where  the   bead  landed  must  succeed  on  a  DC  15  Dexterity   saving  throw  or  take  5d4  force  damage.  A  sphere  of   transparent  force  then  encloses  the  area  for  1   minute.  Any  creature  that  failed  the  save  and  is   completely  within  the  area  is  trapped  inside  this   sphere.  Creatures  that  succeeded  on  the  save,  or  are   partially  within  the  area,  are  pushed  away  from  the   center  of  the  sphere  until  they  are  no  longer  inside  it.   Only  breathable  air  can  pass  through  the  sphere's   wall.  No  attack  or  other  effect  can.      An  enclosed  creature  can  use  its  action  to  push   against  the  sphere's  wall,  moving  the  sphere  up  to   half  the  creature's  walking  speed.  The  sphere  can  be   picked  up,  and  its  magic  causes  it  to  weigh  only  1   pound,  regardless  of  the  weight  of  creatures  inside.  

Belt of Dwarvenkind
Wondrous  item,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  this  belt,  you  gain  the  following   benefits:  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

214-]  

·   Your  Constitution  score  increases  by  2,  to  a   maximum  of  20.  
·   You  have  advantage  on  Charisma  (Persuasion)   checks  made  to  interact  with  dwarves.  
In  addition,  while  attuned  to  the  belt,  you  have  a  50   percent  chance  each  day  at  dawn  of  growing  a  full   beard  if  you're  capable  of  growing  one,  or  a  visibly   thicker  beard  if  you  already  have  one.      If  you  aren't  a  dwarf,  you  gain  the  following   additional  benefits  while  wearing  the  belt:  

·   You  have  advantage  on  saving  throws  against   poison,  and  you  have  resistance  against  poison   damage.  
·   You  have  darkvision  out  to  a  range  of  60  feet.   ·   You  can  speak,  read,  and  write  Dwarvish.  

Belt of Giant Strength
Wondrous  item,  rarity  varies  (requires  attunement)  

While  wearing  this  belt,  your  Strength  score  changes   to  a  score  granted  by  the  belt.  If  your  Strength  is   already  equal  to  or  greater  than  the  belt's  score,  the   item  has  no  effect  on  you.      Six  varieties  of  this  belt  exist,  corresponding  with   and  having  rarity  according  to  the  six  kinds  of  true   giants.  The  belt  of  stone  giant  strength  and  the  belt  of   frost  giant  strength  look  different,  but  they  have  the   same  effect.  

Type   Hill  giant   Stone/frost  giant   Fire  giant   Cloud  giant   Storm  giant  

Strength   21   23   25   27   29  

Rarity   Rare   Very  rare   Very  rare   Legendary   Legendary  

Berserker Axe
Weapon  (any  axe),  rare  (requires  attunement)  
You  gain  a  +1  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls   made  with  this  magic  weapon.  In  addition,  while  you   are  attuned  to  this  weapon,  your  hit  point  maximum   increases  by  1  for  each  level  you  have  attained.      Curse.  This  axe  is  cursed,  and  becoming  attuned  to   it  extends  the  curse  to  you.  As  long  as  you  remain   cursed,  you  are  unwilling  to  part  with  the  axe,   keeping  it  within  reach  at  all  times.  You  also  have   disadvantage  on  attack  rolls  with  weapons  other   [-than  this  one,  unless  no  foe  is  within  60-]  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

211  

than  this  one,  unless  no  foe  is  within  60+}  feet  of  you   that  you  can  see  or  hear.      Whenever  a  hostile  creature  damages  you  while   the  axe  is  in  your  possession,  you  must  succeed  on  a   DC  15  Wisdom  saving  throw  or  go  berserk.  While   berserk,  you  must  use  your  action  each  round  to   attack  the  creature  nearest  to  you  with  the  axe.  If   you  can  make  extra  attacks  as  part  of  the  Attack   action,  you  use  those  extra  attacks,  moving  to  attack   the  next  nearest  creature  after  you  fell  your  current   target.  If  you  have  multiple  possible  targets,  you   attack  one  at  random.  You  are  berserk  until  you  start   your  turn  with  no  creatures  within  60  feet  of  you   that  you  can  see  or  hear.  
Boots of Elvenkind
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
While  you  wear  these  boots,  your  steps  make  no   sound,  regardless  of  the  surface  you  are  moving   across.  You  also  have  advantage  on  Dexterity   (Stealth)  checks  that  rely  on  moving  silently.  
Boots of Levitation
Wondrous  item,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
While  you  wear  these  boots,  you  can  use  an  action  to   cast  the  levitate  spell  on  yourself  at  will.  
Boots of Speed
Wondrous  item,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
While  you  wear  these  boots,  you  can  use  a  bonus   action  and  click  the  boots'  heels  together.  If  you  do,   the  boots  double  your  walking  speed,  and  any   creature  that  makes  an  opportunity  attack  against   you  has  disadvantage  on  the  attack  roll.  If  you  click   your  heels  together  again,  you  end  the  effect.      When  the  boots'  property  has  been  used  for  a  total   of  10  minutes,  the  magic  ceases  to  function  until  you   finish  a  long  rest.  
Boots of Striding and Springing
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
While  you  wear  these  boots,  your  walking  speed   becomes  30  feet,  unless  your  walking  speed  is  higher,   and  your  speed  isn't  reduced  if  you  are  encumbered   or  wearing  heavy  armor.  In  addition,  you  can  jump   three  times  the  normal  distance,  though  you  can't   jump  farther  than  your  remaining  movement  would   allow.  

Boots of the Winterlands
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
These  furred  boots  are  snug  and  feel  quite  warm.   While  you  wear  them,  you  gain  the  following   benefits:  
·   You  have  resistance  to  cold  damage.   ·   You  ignore  difficult  terrain  created  by  ice  or  snow.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

215-]   ·   You  can  tolerate  temperatures  as  low  as  -50  
degrees  Fahrenheit  without  any  additional   protection.  If  you  wear  heavy  clothes,  you  can   tolerate  temperatures  as  low  as  -100  degrees   Fahrenheit.  
Bowl of Commanding Water Elementals
Wondrous  item,  rare  
While  this  bowl  is  filled  with  water,  you  can  use  an   action  to  speak  the  bowl's  command  word  and   summon  a  water  elemental,  as  if  you  had  cast  the   conjure  elemental  spell.  The  bowl  can't  be  used  this   way  again  until  the  next  dawn.      The  bowl  is  about  1  foot  in  diameter  and  half  as   deep.  It  weighs  3  pounds  and  holds  about  3  gallons.  
Bracers of Archery
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  these  bracers,  you  have  proficiency   with  the  longbow  and  shortbow,  and  you  gain  a  +2   bonus  to  damage  rolls  on  ranged  attacks  made  with   such  weapons.  
Bracers of Defense
Wondrous  item,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  these  bracers,  you  gain  a  +2  bonus  to   AC  if  you  are  wearing  no  armor  and  using  no  shield.  
Brazier of Commanding Fire Elementals
Wondrous  item,  rare  
While  a  fire  burns  in  this  brass  brazier,  you  can  use   an  action  to  speak  the  brazier's  command  word  and   summon  a  fire  elemental,  as  if  you  had  cast  the   conjure  elemental  spell.  The  brazier  can't  be  used   this  way  again  until  the  next  dawn.      The  brazier  weighs  5  pounds.  
Brooch of Shielding
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  this  brooch,  you  have  resistance  to   force  damage,  and  you  have  immunity  to  damage   from  the  magic  missile  spell.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

212+}  

Broom of Flying
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
This  wooden  broom,  which  weighs  3  pounds,   functions  like  a  mundane  broom  until  you  stand   astride  it  and  speak  its  command  word.  It  then   hovers  beneath  you  and  can  be  ridden  in  the  air.  It   has  a  flying  speed  of  50  feet.  It  can  carry  up  to  400   pounds,  but  its  flying  speed  becomes  30  feet  while   carrying  over  200  pounds.  The  broom  stops   hovering  when  you  land.      You  can  send  the  broom  to  travel  alone  to  a   destination  within  1  mile  of  you  if  you  speak  the   command  word,  name  the  location,  and  are  familiar   with  that  place.  The  broom  comes  back  to  you  when   you  speak  another  command  word,  provided  that   the  broom  is  still  within  1  mile  of  you.  
Candle of Invocation
Wondrous  item,  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  
This  slender  taper  is  dedicated  to  a  deity  and  shares   that  deity's  alignment.  The  candle's  alignment  can  be   detected  with  the  detect  evil  and  good  spell.  The  GM   chooses  the  god  and  associated  alignment  or   determines  the  alignment  randomly.  
d20   Alignment   1­2   Chaotic  evil   3­4   Chaotic  neutral  
5­7   Chaotic  good   8­9   Neutral  evil   10­11   Neutral   12­13   Neutral  good   14­15   Lawful  evil   16­17   Lawful  neutral   18­20   Lawful  good         The  candle's  magic  is  activated  when  the  candle  is   lit,  which  requires  an  action.  After  burning  for  4   hours,  the  candle  is  destroyed.  You  can  snuff  it  out   early  for  use  at  a  later  time.  Deduct  the  time  it   burned  in  increments  of  1  minute  from  the  candle's   total  burn  time.      While  lit,  the  candle  sheds  dim  light  in  a  30-foot   radius.  Any  creature  within  that  light  whose   alignment  matches  that  of  the  candle  makes  attack   rolls,  saving  throws,  and  ability  checks  with   advantage.  In  addition,  a  cleric  or  druid  in  the  light   whose  alignment  matches  the  candle's  can  cast  1st- level  spells  he  or  she  has  prepared  without   expending  spell  slots,  though  the  spell's  effect  is  as  if   cast  with  a  1st-level  slot.  

   Alternatively,  when  you  light  the  candle  for  the   first  time,  you  can  cast  the  gate  spell  with  it.  Doing  so   destroys  the  candle.  

Cape of the Mountebank
Wondrous  item,  rare  
This  cape  smells  faintly  of  brimstone.  While  wearing   it,  you  can  use  it  to  cast  the  dimension  door  spell  as  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

216-]   an  action.  This  property  of  the  cape  can't  be  used   again  until  the  next  dawn.      When  you  disappear,  you  leave  behind  a  cloud  of   smoke,  and  you  appear  in  a  similar  cloud  of  smoke  at   your  destination.  The  smoke  lightly  obscures  the   space  you  left  and  the  space  you  appear  in,  and  it   dissipates  at  the  end  of  your  next  turn.  A  light  or   stronger  wind  disperses  the  smoke.  

Carpet of Flying
Wondrous  item,  very  rare  

You  can  speak  the  carpet's  command  word  as  an   action  to  make  the  carpet  hover  and  fly.  It  moves   according  to  your  spoken  directions,  provided  that   you  are  within  30  feet  of  it.      Four  sizes  of  carpet  of  flying  exist.  The  GM  chooses   the  size  of  a  given  carpet  or  determines  it  randomly.  

d100  

Size   Capacity   Flying  Speed  

01­20   3  ft.  ×  5  ft.   200  lb.  

80  feet  

21­55   4  ft.  ×  6  ft.   400  lb.  

60  feet  

56­80   5  ft.  ×  7  ft.   600  lb.  

40  feet  

81­100   6  ft.  ×  9  ft.   800  lb.  

30  feet  

  

   A  carpet  can  carry  up  to  twice  the  weight  shown  

on  the  table,  but  it  flies  at  half  speed  if  it  carries  

more  than  its  normal  capacity.  

Censer of Controlling Air Elementals
Wondrous  item,  rare  
While  incense  is  burning  in  this  censer,  you  can  use   an  action  to  speak  the  censer's  command  word  and   summon  an  air  elemental,  as  if  you  had  cast  the   conjure  elemental  spell.  The  censer  can't  be  used  this   way  again  until  the  next  dawn.      This  6-inch-wide,  1-foot-high  vessel  resembles  a   chalice  with  a  decorated  lid.  It  weighs  1  pound.  

Chime of Opening
Wondrous  item,  rare  
This  hollow  metal  tube  measures  about  1  foot  long   and  weighs  1  pound.  You  can  strike  it  as  an  action,   pointing  it  at  an  object  within  120  feet  of  you  that   can  be  opened,  such  as  a  door,  lid,  or  lock.  The  chime  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

213+}  

issues  a  clear  tone,  and  one  lock  or  latch  on  the   object  opens  unless  the  sound  can't  reach  the  object.   If  no  locks  or  latches  remain,  the  object  itself  opens.      The  chime  can  be  used  ten  times.  After  the  tenth   time,  it  cracks  and  becomes  useless.  
Circlet of Blasting
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
While  wearing  this  circlet,  you  can  use  an  action  to   cast  the  scorching  ray  spell  with  it.  When  you  make   the  spell's  attacks,  you  do  so  with  an  attack  bonus  of   +5.  The  circlet  can't  be  used  this  way  again  until  the   next  dawn.  
Cloak of Arachnida
Wondrous  item,  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  
This  fine  garment  is  made  of  black  silk  interwoven   with  faint  silvery  threads.  While  wearing  it,  you  gain   the  following  benefits:  
·   You  have  resistance  to  poison  damage.   ·   You  have  a  climbing  speed  equal  to  your  walking  
speed.   ·   You  can  move  up,  down,  and  across  vertical  
surfaces  and  upside  down  along  ceilings,  while   leaving  your  hands  free.   ·   You  can't  be  caught  in  webs  of  any  sort  and  can   move  through  webs  as  if  they  were  difficult  terrain.   ·   You  can  use  an  action  to  cast  the  web  spell  (save   DC  13).  The  web  created  by  the  spell  fills  twice  its   normal  area.  Once  used,  this  property  of  the  cloak   can't  be  used  again  until  the  next  dawn.  
Cloak of Displacement
Wondrous  item,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
While  you  wear  this  cloak,  it  projects  an  illusion  that   makes  you  appear  to  be  standing  in  a  place  near   your  actual  location,  causing  any  creature  to  have   disadvantage  on  attack  rolls  against  you.  If  you  take   damage,  the  property  ceases  to  function  until  the   start  of  your  next  turn.  This  property  is  suppressed   while  you  are  incapacitated,  restrained,  or  otherwise   unable  to  move.  
Cloak of Elvenkind
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
While  you  wear  this  cloak  with  its  hood  up,  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  made  to  see  you  have   disadvantage,  and  you  have  advantage  on  Dexterity   (Stealth)  checks  made  to  hide,  as  the  cloak's  color  

shifts  to  camouflage  you.  Pulling  the  hood  up  or   down  requires  an  action.  
Cloak of Protection
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
You  gain  a  +1  bonus  to  AC  and  saving  throws  while   you  wear  this  cloak.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

217-]  
Cloak of the Bat
Wondrous  item,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  this  cloak,  you  have  advantage  on   Dexterity  (Stealth)  checks.  In  an  area  of  dim  light  or   darkness,  you  can  grip  the  edges  of  the  cloak  with   both  hands  and  use  it  to  fly  at  a  speed  of  40  feet.  If   you  ever  fail  to  grip  the  cloak's  edges  while  flying  in   this  way,  or  if  you  are  no  longer  in  dim  light  or   darkness,  you  lose  this  flying  speed.      While  wearing  the  cloak  in  an  area  of  dim  light  or   darkness,  you  can  use  your  action  to  cast  polymorph   on  yourself,  transforming  into  a  bat.  While  you  are  in   the  form  of  the  bat,  you  retain  your  Intelligence,   Wisdom,  and  Charisma  scores.  The  cloak  can't  be   used  this  way  again  until  the  next  dawn.  
Cloak of the Manta Ray
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
While  wearing  this  cloak  with  its  hood  up,  you  can   breathe  underwater,  and  you  have  a  swimming   speed  of  60  feet.  Pulling  the  hood  up  or  down   requires  an  action.  
Crystal Ball
Wondrous  item,  very  rare  or  legendary  (requires   attunement)  
The  typical  crystal  ball,  a  very  rare  item,  is  about  6   inches  in  diameter.  While  touching  it,  you  can  cast   the  scrying  spell  (save  DC  17)  with  it.      The  following  crystal  ball  variants  are  legendary   items  and  have  additional  properties.      Crystal  Ball  of  Mind  Reading.  You  can  use  an   action  to  cast  the  detect  thoughts  spell  (save  DC  17)   while  you  are  scrying  with  the  crystal  ball,  targeting   creatures  you  can  see  within  30  feet  of  the  spell's   sensor.  You  don't  need  to  concentrate  on  this  detect   thoughts  to  maintain  it  during  its  duration,  but  it   ends  if  scrying  ends.      Crystal  Ball  of  Telepathy.  While  scrying  with  the   crystal  ball,  you  can  communicate  telepathically  with   creatures  you  can  see  within  30  feet  of  the  spell's   sensor.  You  can  also  use  an  action  to  cast  the   suggestion  spell  (save  DC  17)  through  the  sensor  on  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

214+}  

one  of  those  creatures.  You  don't  need  to   concentrate  on  this  suggestion  to  maintain  it  during   its  duration,  but  it  ends  if  scrying  ends.  Once  used,   the  suggestion  power  of  the  crystal  ball  can't  be  used   again  until  the  next  dawn.      Crystal  Ball  of  True  Seeing.  While  scrying  with   the  crystal  ball,  you  have  truesight  with  a  radius  of   120  feet  centered  on  the  spell's  sensor.  
Cube of Force
Wondrous  item,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
This  cube  is  about  an  inch  across.  Each  face  has  a   distinct  marking  on  it  that  can  be  pressed.  The  cube   starts  with  36  charges,  and  it  regains  1d20  expended   charges  daily  at  dawn.      You  can  use  an  action  to  press  one  of  the  cube's   faces,  expending  a  number  of  charges  based  on  the   chosen  face,  as  shown  in  the  Cube  of  Force  Faces   table.  Each  face  has  a  different  effect.  If  the  cube  has   insufficient  charges  remaining,  nothing  happens.   Otherwise,  a  barrier  of  invisible  force  springs  into   existence,  forming  a  cube  15  feet  on  a  side.  The   barrier  is  centered  on  you,  moves  with  you,  and  lasts   for  1  minute,  until  you  use  an  action  to  press  the   cube's  sixth  face,  or  the  cube  runs  out  of  charges.   You  can  change  the  barrier's  effect  by  pressing  a   different  face  of  the  cube  and  expending  the   requisite  number  of  charges,  resetting  the  duration.      If  your  movement  causes  the  barrier  to  come  into   contact  with  a  solid  object  that  can't  pass  through   the  cube,  you  can't  move  any  closer  to  that  object  as   long  as  the  barrier  remains.  
Cube  of  Force  Faces  
Face   Charges   Effect   1   1   Gases,  wind,  and  fog  can't  pass  through   the  barrier.   2   2   Nonliving  matter  can't  pass  through  the   barrier.  Walls,  floors,  and  ceilings  can  pass   through  at  your  discretion.   3   3   Living  matter  can't  pass  through  the   barrier.   4   4   Spell  effects  can't  pass  through  the  barrier.   5   5   Nothing  can  pass  through  the  barrier.   Walls,  floors,  and  ceilings  can  pass  through   at  your  discretion.   6   0   The  barrier  deactivates.  
      The  cube  loses  charges  when  the  barrier  is   targeted  by  certain  spells  or  comes  into  contact  with   certain  spell  or  magic  item  effects,  as  shown  in  the   table  below.  

Spell  or  Item   Disintegrate   Horn  of  blasting   Passwall   Prismatic  spray   Wall  of  fire  

Charges  Lost   1d12   1d10   1d6   1d20   1d4  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

218-]  

Cubic Gate
Wondrous  item,  legendary  
This  cube  is  3  inches  across  and  radiates  palpable   magical  energy.  The  six  sides  of  the  cube  are  each   keyed  to  a  different  plane  of  existence,  one  of  which   is  the  Material  Plane.  The  other  sides  are  linked  to   planes  determined  by  the  GM.      You  can  use  an  action  to  press  one  side  of  the  cube   to  cast  the  gate  spell  with  it,  opening  a  portal  to  the   plane  keyed  to  that  side.  Alternatively,  if  you  use  an   action  to  press  one  side  twice,  you  can  cast  the  plane   shift  spell  (save  DC  17)  with  the  cube  and  transport   the  targets  to  the  plane  keyed  to  that  side.      The  cube  has  3  charges.  Each  use  of  the  cube   expends  1  charge.  The  cube  regains  1d3  expended   charges  daily  at  dawn.  

Dagger of Venom
Weapon  (dagger),  rare  
You  gain  a  +1  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls   made  with  this  magic  weapon.      You  can  use  an  action  to  cause  thick,  black  poison   to  coat  the  blade.  The  poison  remains  for  1  minute   or  until  an  attack  using  this  weapon  hits  a  creature.   That  creature  must  succeed  on  a  DC  15  Constitution   saving  throw  or  take  2d10  poison  damage  and   become  poisoned  for  1  minute.  The  dagger  can't  be   used  this  way  again  until  the  next  dawn.  

Dancing Sword
Weapon  (any  sword),  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  
You  can  use  a  bonus  action  to  toss  this  magic  sword   into  the  air  and  speak  the  command  word.  When  you   do  so,  the  sword  begins  to  hover,  flies  up  to  30  feet,   and  attacks  one  creature  of  your  choice  within  5  feet   of  it.  The  sword  uses  your  attack  roll  and  ability   score  modifier  to  damage  rolls.      While  the  sword  hovers,  you  can  use  a  bonus   action  to  cause  it  to  fly  up  to  30  feet  to  another  spot   within  30  feet  of  you.  As  part  of  the  same  bonus   action,  you  can  cause  the  sword  to  attack  one   creature  within  5  feet  of  it.      After  the  hovering  sword  attacks  for  the  fourth   time,  it  flies  up  to  30  feet  and  tries  to  return  to  your   hand.  If  you  have  no  hand  free,  it  falls  to  the  ground  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

215+}  

at  your  feet.  If  the  sword  has  no  unobstructed  path   to  you,  it  moves  as  close  to  you  as  it  can  and  then   falls  to  the  ground.  It  also  ceases  to  hover  if  you   grasp  it  or  move  more  than  30  feet  away  from  it.  
Decanter of Endless Water
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
This  stoppered  flask  sloshes  when  shaken,  as  if  it   contains  water.  The  decanter  weighs  2  pounds.      You  can  use  an  action  to  remove  the  stopper  and   speak  one  of  three  command  words,  whereupon  an   amount  of  fresh  water  or  salt  water  (your  choice)   pours  out  of  the  flask.  The  water  stops  pouring  out  at   the  start  of  your  next  turn.  Choose  from  the   following  options:  
·   "Stream"  produces  1  gallon  of  water.   ·   "Fountain"  produces  5  gallons  of  water.   ·   "Geyser"  produces  30  gallons  of  water  that  gushes  
forth  in  a  geyser  30  feet  long  and  1  foot  wide.  As  a   bonus  action  while  holding  the  decanter,  you  can   aim  the  geyser  at  a  creature  you  can  see  within  30   feet  of  you.  The  target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  13   Strength  saving  throw  or  take  1d4  bludgeoning   damage  and  fall  prone.  Instead  of  a  creature,  you   can  target  an  object  that  isn't  being  worn  or   carried  and  that  weighs  no  more  than  200  pounds.   The  object  is  either  knocked  over  or  pushed  up  to   15  feet  away  from  you.  
Deck of Illusions
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
This  box  contains  a  set  of  parchment  cards.  A  full   deck  has  34  cards.  A  deck  found  as  treasure  is   usually  missing  1d20  -  1  cards.      The  magic  of  the  deck  functions  only  if  cards  are   drawn  at  random  (you  can  use  an  altered  deck  of   playing  cards  to  simulate  the  deck).  You  can  use  an   action  to  draw  a  card  at  random  from  the  deck  and   throw  it  to  the  ground  at  a  point  within  30  feet  of   you.      An  illusion  of  one  or  more  creatures  forms  over   the  thrown  card  and  remains  until  dispelled.  An   illusory  creature  appears  real,  of  the  appropriate   size,  and  behaves  as  if  it  were  a  real  creature  except   that  it  can  do  no  harm.  While  you  are  within  120  feet   of  the  illusory  creature  and  can  see  it,  you  can  use  an   action  to  move  it  magically  anywhere  within  30  feet   of  its  card.  Any  physical  interaction  with  the  illusory   creature  reveals  it  to  be  an  illusion,  because  objects   pass  through  it.  Someone  who  uses  an  action  to   visually  inspect  the  creature  identifies  it  as  illusory  

with  a  successful  DC  15  Intelligence  (Investigation)   check.  The  creature  then  appears  translucent.      The  illusion  lasts  until  its  card  is  moved  or  the   illusion  is  dispelled.  When  the  illusion  ends,  the  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

219-]   image  on  its  card  disappears,  and  that  card  can't  be   used  again.  

Playing  Card   Ace  of  hearts   King  of  hearts   Queen  of  hearts   Jack  of  hearts   Ten  of  hearts   Nine  of  hearts   Eight  of  hearts   Two  of  hearts  

Illusion   Red  dragon   Knight  and  four  guards   Succubus  or  incubus   Druid   Cloud  giant   Ettin   Bugbear   Goblin  

Ace  of  diamonds   King  of  diamonds   Queen  of  diamonds   Jack  of  diamonds   Ten  of  diamonds   Nine  of  diamonds   Eight  of  diamonds   Two  of  diamonds  

Beholder   Archmage  and  mage  apprentice   Night  hag   Assassin   Fire  giant   Ogre  mage   Gnoll   Kobold  

Ace  of  spades   King  of  spades   Queen  of  spades   Jack  of  spades   Ten  of  spades   Nine  of  spades   Eight  of  spades   Two  of  spades  

[-Lich   Priest  and  two  acolytes   Medusa   Veteran   Frost  giant   Troll   Hobgoblin   Goblin-]  
Ace  of  clubs   King  of  clubs   Queen  of  clubs   Jack  of  clubs   Ten  of  clubs   Nine  of  clubs   Eight  of  clubs   Two  of  clubs  
Jokers  (2)  

{+Lich   Priest  and  two  acolytes   Medusa   Veteran   Frost  giant   Troll   Hobgoblin   Goblin+}  
Iron  golem   Bandit  captain  and  three  bandits   Erinyes   Berserker   Hill  giant   Ogre   Orc   Kobold  
You  (the  deck's  owner)  

Deck of Many Things
Wondrous  item,  legendary  
Usually  found  in  a  box  or  pouch,  this  deck  contains  a   number  of  cards  made  of  ivory  or  vellum.  Most  (75   percent)  of  these  decks  have  only  thirteen  cards,  but   the  rest  have  twenty-two.      Before  you  draw  a  card,  you  must  declare  how   many  cards  you  intend  to  draw  and  then  draw  them   randomly  (you  can  use  an  altered  deck  of  playing   cards  to  simulate  the  deck).  Any  cards  drawn  in   excess  of  this  number  have  no  effect.  Otherwise,  as  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

216+}  

soon  as  you  draw  a  card  from  the  deck,  its  magic   takes  effect.  You  must  draw  each  card  no  more  than   1  hour  after  the  previous  draw.  If  you  fail  to  draw   the  chosen  number,  the  remaining  number  of  cards   fly  from  the  deck  on  their  own  and  take  effect  all  at   once.      Once  a  card  is  drawn,  it  fades  from  existence.   Unless  the  card  is  the  Fool  or  the  Jester,  the  card   reappears  in  the  deck,  making  it  possible  to  draw  the   same  card  twice.  

Playing  Card  

Card  

Ace  of  diamonds   Vizier*  

King  of  diamonds   Sun  

Queen  of  diamonds   Moon  

Jack  of  diamonds   Star  

Two  of  diamonds   Comet*  

Ace  of  hearts  

The  Fates*  

King  of  hearts  

Throne  

Queen  of  hearts  

Key  

Jack  of  hearts  

Knight  

Two  of  hearts  

Gem*  

Ace  of  clubs  

Talons*  

King  of  clubs  

The  Void  

Queen  of  clubs  

Flames  

Jack  of  clubs  

Skull  

Two  of  clubs  

Idiot*  

Ace  of  spades  

Donjon*  

King  of  spades  

Ruin  

Queen  of  spades   Euryale  

Jack  of  spades  

Rogue  

Two  of  spades  

Balance*  

Joker  (with  TM)  

Fool*  

Joker  (without  TM)   Jester  

*Found  only  in  a  deck  with  twenty-two  cards  

  

   Balance.  Your  mind  suffers  a  wrenching  alteration,  

causing  your  alignment  to  change.  Lawful  becomes  

chaotic,  good  becomes  evil,  and  vice  versa.  If  you  are  

true  neutral  or  unaligned,  this  card  has  no  effect  on  

you.  

   Comet.  If  you  single-handedly  defeat  the  next  

hostile  monster  or  group  of  monsters  you  encounter,  

you  gain  experience  points  enough  to  gain  one  level.  

Otherwise,  this  card  has  no  effect.  

   Donjon.  You  disappear  and  become  entombed  in  a  

state  of  suspended  animation  in  an  extradimensional  

sphere.  Everything  you  were  wearing  and  carrying  

stays  behind  in  the  space  you  occupied  when  you  

disappeared.  You  remain  imprisoned  until  you  are  

found  and  removed  from  the  sphere.  You  can't  be  

located  by  any  divination  magic,  but  a  wish  spell  can  

reveal  the  location  of  your  prison.  You  draw  no  more  

cards.  

   Euryale.  The  card's  medusa-like  visage  curses  you.   You  take  a  -2  penalty  on  saving  throws  while  cursed   in  this  way.  Only  a  god  or  the  magic  of  The  Fates   card  can  end  this  curse.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

220-]      The  Fates.  Reality's  fabric  unravels  and  spins   anew,  allowing  you  to  avoid  or  erase  one  event  as  if   it  never  happened.  You  can  use  the  card's  magic  as   soon  as  you  draw  the  card  or  at  any  other  time   before  you  die.      Flames.  A  powerful  devil  becomes  your  enemy.   The  devil  seeks  your  ruin  and  plagues  your  life,   savoring  your  suffering  before  attempting  to  slay   you.  This  enmity  lasts  until  either  you  or  the  devil   dies.      Fool.  You  lose  10,000  XP,  discard  this  card,  and   draw  from  the  deck  again,  counting  both  draws  as   one  of  your  declared  draws.  If  losing  that  much  XP   would  cause  you  to  lose  a  level,  you  instead  lose  an   amount  that  leaves  you  with  just  enough  XP  to  keep   your  level.      Gem.  Twenty-five  pieces  of  jewelry  worth  2,000   gp  each  or  fifty  gems  worth  1,000  gp  each  appear  at   your  feet.      Idiot.  Permanently  reduce  your  Intelligence  by   1d4  +  1  (to  a  minimum  score  of  1).  You  can  draw  one   additional  card  beyond  your  declared  draws.      Jester.  You  gain  10,000  XP,  or  you  can  draw  two   additional  cards  beyond  your  declared  draws.      Key.  A  rare  or  rarer  magic  weapon  with  which  you   are  proficient  appears  in  your  hands.  The  GM   chooses  the  weapon.      Knight.  You  gain  the  service  of  a  4th-level  fighter   who  appears  in  a  space  you  choose  within  30  feet  of   you.  The  fighter  is  of  the  same  race  as  you  and  serves   you  loyally  until  death,  believing  the  fates  have   drawn  him  or  her  to  you.  You  control  this  character.      Moon.  You  are  granted  the  ability  to  cast  the  wish   spell  1d3  times.      Rogue.  A  nonplayer  character  of  the  GM's  choice   becomes  hostile  toward  you.  The  identity  of  your   new  enemy  isn't  known  until  the  NPC  or  someone   else  reveals  it.  Nothing  less  than  a  wish  spell  or   divine  intervention  can  end  the  NPC's  hostility   toward  you.      Ruin.  All  forms  of  wealth  that  you  carry  or  own,   other  than  magic  items,  are  lost  to  you.  Portable   property  vanishes.  Businesses,  buildings,  and  land   you  own  are  lost  in  a  way  that  alters  reality  the  least.   Any  documentation  that  proves  you  should  own   something  lost  to  this  card  also  disappears.      Skull.  You  summon  an  avatar  of  death--a  ghostly   humanoid  skeleton  clad  in  a  tattered  black  robe  and   carrying  a  spectral  scythe.  It  appears  in  a  space  of  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

217+}  

the  GM's  choice  within  10  feet  of  you  and  attacks  you,   warning  all  others  that  you  must  win  the  battle  alone.   The  avatar  fights  until  you  die  or  it  drops  to  0  hit   points,  whereupon  it  disappears.  If  anyone  tries  to   help  you,  the  helper  summons  its  own  avatar  of   death.  A  creature  slain  by  an  avatar  of  death  can't  be   restored  to  life.  
Avatar  of  Death  
Medium  undead,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  20  
Hit  Points  half  the  hit  point  maximum  of  its  summoner  
Speed  60  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  (hover)  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   16  (+3)   16  (+3)   16  (+3)   16  (+3)   16  (+3)   16  (+3)  
Damage  Immunities  necrotic,  poison  
Condition  Immunities  charmed,  frightened,  paralyzed,   petrified,  poisoned,  unconscious  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  truesight  60  ft.,  passive   Perception  13  
Languages  all  languages  known  to  its  summoner  
Challenge  --  (0  XP)  
  
Incorporeal  Movement.  The  avatar  can  move  through   other  creatures  and  objects  as  if  they  were  difficult   terrain.  It  takes  5  (1d10)  force  damage  if  it  ends  its  turn   inside  an  object.  
Turning  Immunity.  The  avatar  is  immune  to  features   that  turn  undead.  
Actions  
Reaping  Scythe. The  avatar  sweeps  its  spectral  scythe   through  a  creature  within  5  feet  of  it,  dealing  7  (1d8  +   3)  slashing  damage  plus  4  (1d8)  necrotic  damage.         Star.  Increase  one  of  your  ability  scores  by  2.  The   score  can  exceed  20  but  can't  exceed  24.      Sun.  You  gain  50,000  XP,  and  a  wondrous  item   (which  the  GM  determines  randomly)  appears  in   your  hands.      Talons.  Every  magic  item  you  wear  or  carry   disintegrates.  Artifacts  in  your  possession  aren't   destroyed  but  do  vanish.      Throne.  You  gain  proficiency  in  the  Persuasion   skill,  and  you  double  your  proficiency  bonus  on   checks  made  with  that  skill.  In  addition,  you  gain   rightful  ownership  of  a  small  keep  somewhere  in  the  

world.  However,  the  keep  is  currently  in  the  hands  of   monsters,  which  you  must  clear  out  before  you  can   claim  the  keep  as  yours.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

221-]      Vizier.  At  any  time  you  choose  within  one  year  of   drawing  this  card,  you  can  ask  a  question  in   meditation  and  mentally  receive  a  truthful  answer  to   that  question.  Besides  information,  the  answer  helps   you  solve  a  puzzling  problem  or  other  dilemma.  In   other  words,  the  knowledge  comes  with  wisdom  on   how  to  apply  it.      The  Void.  This  black  card  spells  disaster.  Your  soul   is  drawn  from  your  body  and  contained  in  an  object   in  a  place  of  the  GM's  choice.  One  or  more  powerful   beings  guard  the  place.  While  your  soul  is  trapped  in   this  way,  your  body  is  incapacitated.  A  wish  spell   can't  restore  your  soul,  but  the  spell  reveals  the   location  of  the  object  that  holds  it.  You  draw  no  more   cards.  
Defender
Weapon  (any  sword),  legendary  (requires   attunement)  
You  gain  a  +3  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls   made  with  this  magic  weapon.      The  first  time  you  attack  with  the  sword  on  each  of   your  turns,  you  can  transfer  some  or  all  of  the   sword's  bonus  to  your  Armor  Class,  instead  of  using   the  bonus  on  any  attacks  that  turn.  For  example,  you   could  reduce  the  bonus  to  your  attack  and  damage   rolls  to  +1  and  gain  a  +2  bonus  to  AC.  The  adjusted   bonuses  remain  in  effect  until  the  start  of  your  next   turn,  although  you  must  hold  the  sword  to  gain  a   bonus  to  AC  from  it.  
Demon Armor
Armor  (plate),  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  this  armor,  you  gain  a  +1  bonus  to  AC,   and  you  can  understand  and  speak  Abyssal.  In   addition,  the  armor's  clawed  gauntlets  turn  unarmed   strikes  with  your  hands  into  magic  weapons  that   deal  slashing  damage,  with  a  +1  bonus  to  attack  rolls   and  damage  rolls  and  a  damage  die  of  1d8.      Curse.  Once  you  don  this  cursed  armor,  you  can't   doff  it  unless  you  are  targeted  by  the  remove  curse   spell  or  similar  magic.  While  wearing  the  armor,  you   have  disadvantage  on  attack  rolls  against  demons   and  on  saving  throws  against  their  spells  and  special   abilities.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

218+}  

Dimensional Shackles
Wondrous  item,  rare  
You  can  use  an  action  to  place  these  shackles  on  an   incapacitated  creature.  The  shackles  adjust  to  fit  a   creature  of  Small  to  Large  size.  In  addition  to  serving   as  mundane  manacles,  the  shackles  prevent  a   creature  bound  by  them  from  using  any  method  of   extradimensional  movement,  including  teleportation   or  travel  to  a  different  plane  of  existence.  They  don't   prevent  the  creature  from  passing  through  an   interdimensional  portal.      You  and  any  creature  you  designate  when  you  use   the  shackles  can  use  an  action  to  remove  them.  Once   every  30  days,  the  bound  creature  can  make  a  DC  30   Strength  (Athletics)  check.  On  a  success,  the  creature   breaks  free  and  destroys  the  shackles.  

Dragon Scale Mail
Armor  (scale  mail),  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  

Dragon  scale  mail  is  made  of  the  scales  of  one  kind  of   dragon.  Sometimes  dragons  collect  their  cast-off   scales  and  gift  them  to  humanoids.  Other  times,   hunters  carefully  skin  and  preserve  the  hide  of  a   dead  dragon.  In  either  case,  dragon  scale  mail  is   highly  valued.      While  wearing  this  armor,  you  gain  a  +1  bonus  to   AC,  you  have  advantage  on  saving  throws  against  the   Frightful  Presence  and  breath  weapons  of  dragons,   and  you  have  resistance  to  one  damage  type  that  is   determined  by  the  kind  of  dragon  that  provided  the   scales  (see  the  table).      Additionally,  you  can  focus  your  senses  as  an   action  to  magically  discern  the  distance  and   direction  to  the  closest  dragon  within  30  miles  of   you  that  is  of  the  same  type  as  the  armor.  This   special  action  can't  be  used  again  until  the  next   dawn.  

Dragon   Resistance      Dragon   Resistance  

Black   Acid  

   Gold   Fire  

Blue   Lightning      Green   Poison  

Brass   Fire  

   Red  

Fire  

Bronze   Lightning      Silver   Cold  

Copper   Acid  

   White   Cold  

Dragon Slayer
Weapon  (any  sword),  rare  
You  gain  a  +1  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls   made  with  this  magic  weapon.      When  you  hit  a  dragon  with  this  weapon,  the   dragon  takes  an  extra  3d6  damage  of  the  weapon's   type.  For  the  purpose  of  this  weapon,  "dragon"  

refers  to  any  creature  with  the  dragon  type,   including  dragon  turtles  and  wyverns.  
Dust of Disappearance
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
Found  in  a  small  packet,  this  powder  resembles  very   fine  sand.  There  is  enough  of  it  for  one  use.  When  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

222-]   you  use  an  action  to  throw  the  dust  into  the  air,  you   and  each  creature  and  object  within  10  feet  of  you   become  invisible  for  2d4  minutes.  The  duration  is   the  same  for  all  subjects,  and  the  dust  is  consumed   when  its  magic  takes  effect.  If  a  creature  affected  by   the  dust  attacks  or  casts  a  spell,  the  invisibility  ends   for  that  creature.  
Dust of Dryness
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
This  small  packet  contains  1d6  +  4  pinches  of  dust.   You  can  use  an  action  to  sprinkle  a  pinch  of  it  over   water.  The  dust  turns  a  cube  of  water  15  feet  on  a   side  into  one  marble-sized  pellet,  which  floats  or   rests  near  where  the  dust  was  sprinkled.  The  pellet's   weight  is  negligible.      Someone  can  use  an  action  to  smash  the  pellet   against  a  hard  surface,  causing  the  pellet  to  shatter   and  release  the  water  the  dust  absorbed.  Doing  so   ends  that  pellet's  magic.      An  elemental  composed  mostly  of  water  that  is   exposed  to  a  pinch  of  the  dust  must  make  a  DC  13   Constitution  saving  throw,  taking  10d6  necrotic   damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on   a  successful  one.  
Dust of Sneezing and Choking
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
Found  in  a  small  container,  this  powder  resembles   very  fine  sand.  It  appears  to  be  dust  of  disappearance,   and  an  identify  spell  reveals  it  to  be  such.  There  is   enough  of  it  for  one  use.      When  you  use  an  action  to  throw  a  handful  of  the   dust  into  the  air,  you  and  each  creature  that  needs  to   breathe  within  30  feet  of  you  must  succeed  on  a  DC   15  Constitution  saving  throw  or  become  unable  to   breathe,  while  sneezing  uncontrollably.  A  creature   affected  in  this  way  is  incapacitated  and  suffocating.   As  long  as  it  is  conscious,  a  creature  can  repeat  the   saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  it  on  a  success.  The  lesser  restoration   spell  can  also  end  the  effect  on  a  creature.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

219+}  

Dwarven Plate
Armor  (plate),  very  rare  
While  wearing  this  armor,  you  gain  a  +2  bonus  to  AC.   In  addition,  if  an  effect  moves  you  against  your  will   along  the  ground,  you  can  use  your  reaction  to   reduce  the  distance  you  are  moved  by  up  to  10  feet.  

Dwarven Thrower
Weapon  (warhammer),  very  rare  (requires   attunement  by  a  dwarf)  
You  gain  a  +3  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls   made  with  this  magic  weapon.  It  has  the  thrown   property  with  a  normal  range  of  20  feet  and  a  long   range  of  60  feet.  When  you  hit  with  a  ranged  attack   using  this  weapon,  it  deals  an  extra  1d8  damage  or,  if   the  target  is  a  giant,  2d8  damage.  Immediately  after   the  attack,  the  weapon  flies  back  to  your  hand.  

Efficient Quiver
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
Each  of  the  quiver's  three  compartments  connects  to   an  extradimensional  space  that  allows  the  quiver  to   hold  numerous  items  while  never  weighing  more   than  2  pounds.  The  shortest  compartment  can  hold   up  to  sixty  arrows,  bolts,  or  similar  objects.  The   midsize  compartment  holds  up  to  eighteen  javelins   or  similar  objects.  The  longest  compartment  holds   up  to  six  long  objects,  such  as  bows,  quarterstaffs,  or   spears.      You  can  draw  any  item  the  quiver  contains  as  if   doing  so  from  a  regular  quiver  or  scabbard.  

Efreeti Bottle
Wondrous  item,  very  rare  

This  painted  brass  bottle  weighs  1  pound.  When  you   use  an  action  to  remove  the  stopper,  a  cloud  of  thick   smoke  flows  out  of  the  bottle.  At  the  end  of  your  turn,   the  smoke  disappears  with  a  flash  of  harmless  fire,   and  an  efreeti  appears  in  an  unoccupied  space   within  30  feet  of  you.      The  first  time  the  bottle  is  opened,  the  GM  rolls  to   determine  what  happens.  

d100   01­10  
11­90  
[-91­00-]  

Effect   The  efreeti  attacks  you.  After  fighting  for  5   rounds,  the  efreeti  disappears,  and  the  bottle   loses  its  magic.   The  efreeti  serves  you  for  1  hour,  doing  as  you   command.  Then  the  efreeti  returns  to  the  bottle,   and  a  new  stopper  contains  it.  The  stopper  can't   be  removed  for  24  hours.  The  next  two  times  the   bottle  is  opened,  the  same  effect  occurs.  If  the  

{+91­00+}  

bottle  is  opened  a  fourth  time,  the  efreeti   escapes  and  disappears,  and  the  bottle  loses  its   magic.   The  efreeti  can  cast  the  wish  spell  three  times  for   you.  It  disappears  when  it  grants  the  final  wish  or   after  1  hour,  and  the  bottle  loses  its  magic.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

223-]  

Elemental Gem
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  

This  gem  contains  a  mote  of  elemental  energy.  When   you  use  an  action  to  break  the  gem,  an  elemental  is   summoned  as  if  you  had  cast  the  conjure  elemental   spell,  and  the  gem's  magic  is  lost.  The  type  of  gem   determines  the  elemental  summoned  by  the  spell.  

Gem   Blue  sapphire  
Yellow  diamond  
Red  corundum  
Emerald  

Summoned  Elemental   Air  elemental  
Earth  elemental  
Fire  elemental  
Water  elemental  

  

Elven Chain
Armor  (chain  shirt),  rare  
You  gain  a  +1  bonus  to  AC  while  you  wear  this  armor.   You  are  considered  proficient  with  this  armor  even  if   you  lack  proficiency  with  medium  armor.  
Eversmoking Bottle
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
Smoke  leaks  from  the  lead-stoppered  mouth  of  this   brass  bottle,  which  weighs  1  pound.  When  you  use   an  action  to  remove  the  stopper,  a  cloud  of  thick   smoke  pours  out  in  a  60-foot  radius  from  the  bottle.   The  cloud's  area  is  heavily  obscured.  Each  minute   the  bottle  remains  open  and  within  the  cloud,  the   radius  increases  by  10  feet  until  it  reaches  its   maximum  radius  of  120  feet.      The  cloud  persists  as  long  as  the  bottle  is  open.   Closing  the  bottle  requires  you  to  speak  its   command  word  as  an  action.  Once  the  bottle  is   closed,  the  cloud  disperses  after  10  minutes.  A   moderate  wind  (11  to  20  miles  per  hour)  can  also   disperse  the  smoke  after  1  minute,  and  a  strong   wind  (21  or  more  miles  per  hour)  can  do  so  after  1   round.  
Eyes of Charming
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
These  crystal  lenses  fit  over  the  eyes.  They  have  3   charges.  While  wearing  them,  you  can  expend  1   charge  as  an  action  to  cast  the  charm  person  spell  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

220+}  

(save  DC  13)  on  a  humanoid  within  30  feet  of  you,   provided  that  you  and  the  target  can  see  each  other.   The  lenses  regain  all  expended  charges  daily  at  dawn.  

Eyes of Minute Seeing
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
These  crystal  lenses  fit  over  the  eyes.  While  wearing   them,  you  can  see  much  better  than  normal  out  to  a   range  of  1  foot.  You  have  advantage  on  Intelligence   (Investigation)  checks  that  rely  on  sight  while   searching  an  area  or  studying  an  object  within  that   range.  

Eyes of the Eagle
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
These  crystal  lenses  fit  over  the  eyes.  While  wearing   them,  you  have  advantage  on  Wisdom  (Perception)   checks  that  rely  on  sight.  In  conditions  of  clear   visibility,  you  can  make  out  details  of  even  extremely   distant  creatures  and  objects  as  small  as  2  feet   across.  

Feather Token
Wondrous  item,  rare  

This  tiny  object  looks  like  a  feather.  Different  types   of  feather  tokens  exist,  each  with  a  different  single- use  effect.  The  GM  chooses  the  kind  of  token  or   determines  it  randomly.  

d100   Feather  Token      d100   Feather  Token  

01­20   Anchor  

   51­65   Swan  boat  

21­35   Bird  

   66­90   Tree  

36­50   Fan  

   91­00   Whip  

  

   Anchor.  You  can  use  an  action  to  touch  the  token  

to  a  boat  or  ship.  For  the  next  24  hours,  the  vessel  

can't  be  moved  by  any  means.  Touching  the  token  to  

the  vessel  again  ends  the  effect.  When  the  effect  ends,  

the  token  disappears.  

   Bird.  You  can  use  an  action  to  toss  the  token  5  feet  

into  the  air.  The  token  disappears  and  an  enormous,  

multicolored  bird  takes  its  place.  The  bird  has  the  

statistics  of  a  roc,  but  it  obeys  your  simple  

commands  and  can't  attack.  It  can  carry  up  to  500  

pounds  while  flying  at  its  maximum  speed  (16  miles  

an  hour  for  a  maximum  of  144  miles  per  day,  with  a  

one-hour  rest  for  every  3  hours  of  flying),  or  1,000  

pounds  at  half  that  speed.  The  bird  disappears  after  

flying  its  maximum  distance  for  a  day  or  if  it  drops  to  

0  hit  points.  You  can  dismiss  the  bird  as  an  action.  

   Fan.  If  you  are  on  a  boat  or  ship,  you  can  use  an  

action  to  toss  the  token  up  to  10  feet  in  the  air.  The  

token  disappears,  and  a  giant  flapping  fan  takes  its   place.  The  fan  floats  and  creates  a  wind  strong   enough  to  fill  the  sails  of  one  ship,  increasing  its  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

224-]   speed  by  5  miles  per  hour  for  8  hours.  You  can   dismiss  the  fan  as  an  action.      Swan  Boat.  You  can  use  an  action  to  touch  the   token  to  a  body  of  water  at  least  60  feet  in  diameter.   The  token  disappears,  and  a  50-foot-long,  20-foot- wide  boat  shaped  like  a  swan  takes  its  place.  The   boat  is  self-propelled  and  moves  across  water  at  a   speed  of  6  miles  per  hour.  You  can  use  an  action   while  on  the  boat  to  command  it  to  move  or  to  turn   up  to  90  degrees.  The  boat  can  carry  up  to  thirty-two   Medium  or  smaller  creatures.  A  Large  creature   counts  as  four  Medium  creatures,  while  a  Huge   creature  counts  as  nine.  The  boat  remains  for  24   hours  and  then  disappears.  You  can  dismiss  the  boat   as  an  action.      Tree.  You  must  be  outdoors  to  use  this  token.  You   can  use  an  action  to  touch  it  to  an  unoccupied  space   on  the  ground.  The  token  disappears,  and  in  its  place   a  nonmagical  oak  tree  springs  into  existence.  The   tree  is  60  feet  tall  and  has  a  5-foot-diameter  trunk,   and  its  branches  at  the  top  spread  out  in  a  20-foot   radius.      Whip.  You  can  use  an  action  to  throw  the  token  to   a  point  within  10  feet  of  you.  The  token  disappears,   and  a  floating  whip  takes  its  place.  You  can  then  use   a  bonus  action  to  make  a  melee  spell  attack  against  a   creature  within  10  feet  of  the  whip,  with  an  attack   bonus  of  +9.  On  a  hit,  the  target  takes  1d6  +  5  force   damage.      As  a  bonus  action  on  your  turn,  you  can  direct  the   whip  to  fly  up  to  20  feet  and  repeat  the  attack   against  a  creature  within  10  feet  of  it.  The  whip   disappears  after  1  hour,  when  you  use  an  action  to   dismiss  it,  or  when  you  are  incapacitated  or  die.  
Figurine of Wondrous Power
Wondrous  item,  rarity  by  figurine  
A  figurine  of  wondrous  power  is  a  statuette  of  a  beast   small  enough  to  fit  in  a  pocket.  If  you  use  an  action  to   speak  the  command  word  and  throw  the  figurine  to   a  point  on  the  ground  within  60  feet  of  you,  the   figurine  becomes  a  living  creature.  If  the  space   where  the  creature  would  appear  is  occupied  by   other  creatures  or  objects,  or  if  there  isn't  enough   space  for  the  creature,  the  figurine  doesn't  become  a   creature.      The  creature  is  friendly  to  you  and  your   companions.  It  understands  your  languages  and   obeys  your  spoken  commands.  If  you  issue  no  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

221+}  

commands,  the  creature  defends  itself  but  takes  no   other  actions.      The  creature  exists  for  a  duration  specific  to  each   figurine.  At  the  end  of  the  duration,  the  creature   reverts  to  its  figurine  form.  It  reverts  to  a  figurine   early  if  it  drops  to  0  hit  points  or  if  you  use  an  action   to  speak  the  command  word  again  while  touching  it.   When  the  creature  becomes  a  figurine  again,  its   property  can't  be  used  again  until  a  certain  amount   of  time  has  passed,  as  specified  in  the  figurine's   description.      Bronze  Griffon  (Rare).  This  bronze  statuette  is  of   a  griffon  rampant.  It  can  become  a  griffon  for  up  to  6   hours.  Once  it  has  been  used,  it  can't  be  used  again   until  5  days  have  passed.      Ebony  Fly  (Rare).  This  ebony  statuette  is  carved   in  the  likeness  of  a  horsefly.  It  can  become  a  giant  fly   for  up  to  12  hours  and  can  be  ridden  as  a  mount.   Once  it  has  been  used,  it  can't  be  used  again  until  2   days  have  passed.  
Giant  Fly  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  11  
Hit  Points  19  (3d10  +  3)  
Speed  30  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   14  (+2)   13  (+1)   13  (+1)   2  (-4)   10  (+0)   3  (-4)  
  Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10  
Languages  --         Golden  Lions  (Rare).  These  gold  statuettes  of   lions  are  always  created  in  pairs.  You  can  use  one   figurine  or  both  simultaneously.  Each  can  become  a   lion  for  up  to  1  hour.  Once  a  lion  has  been  used,  it   can't  be  used  again  until  7  days  have  passed.      Ivory  Goats  (Rare).  These  ivory  statuettes  of   goats  are  always  created  in  sets  of  three.  Each  goat   looks  unique  and  functions  differently  from  the   others.  Their  properties  are  as  follows:  
·   The  goat  of  traveling  can  become  a  Large  goat  with   the  same  statistics  as  a  riding  horse.  It  has  24   charges,  and  each  hour  or  portion  thereof  it   spends  in  beast  form  costs  1  charge.  While  it  has   charges,  you  can  use  it  as  often  as  you  wish.  When   it  runs  out  of  charges,  it  reverts  to  a  figurine  and   can't  be  used  again  until  7  days  have  passed,  when   it  regains  all  its  charges.  

·   The  goat  of  travail  becomes  a  giant  goat  for  up  to  3   hours.  Once  it  has  been  used,  it  can't  be  used  again   until  30  days  have  passed.  
·   The  goat  of  terror  becomes  a  giant  goat  for  up  to  3   hours.  The  goat  can't  attack,  but  you  can  remove  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

225-]   its  horns  and  use  them  as  weapons.  One  horn   becomes  a  +1  lance,  and  the  other  becomes  a  +2   longsword.  Removing  a  horn  requires  an  action,   and  the  weapons  disappear  and  the  horns  return   when  the  goat  reverts  to  figurine  form.  In  addition,   the  goat  radiates  a  30-foot-radius  aura  of  terror   while  you  are  riding  it.  Any  creature  hostile  to  you   that  starts  its  turn  in  the  aura  must  succeed  on  a   DC  15  Wisdom  saving  throw  or  be  frightened  of   the  goat  for  1  minute,  or  until  the  goat  reverts  to   figurine  form.  The  frightened  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,   ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  Once  it   successfully  saves  against  the  effect,  a  creature  is   immune  to  the  goat's  aura  for  the  next  24  hours.   Once  the  figurine  has  been  used,  it  can't  be  used   again  until  15  days  have  passed.  
   Marble  Elephant  (Rare).  This  marble  statuette  is   about  4  inches  high  and  long.  It  can  become  an   elephant  for  up  to  24  hours.  Once  it  has  been  used,  it   can't  be  used  again  until  7  days  have  passed.      Obsidian  Steed  (Very  Rare).  This  polished   obsidian  horse  can  become  a  nightmare  for  up  to  24   hours.  The  nightmare  fights  only  to  defend  itself.   Once  it  has  been  used,  it  can't  be  used  again  until  5   days  have  passed.      If  you  have  a  good  alignment,  the  figurine  has  a  10   percent  chance  each  time  you  use  it  to  ignore  your   orders,  including  a  command  to  revert  to  figurine   form.  If  you  mount  the  nightmare  while  it  is  ignoring   your  orders,  you  and  the  nightmare  are  instantly   transported  to  a  random  location  on  the  plane  of   Hades,  where  the  nightmare  reverts  to  figurine  form.      Onyx  Dog  (Rare).  This  onyx  statuette  of  a  dog  can   become  a  mastiff  for  up  to  6  hours.  The  mastiff  has   an  Intelligence  of  8  and  can  speak  Common.  It  also   has  darkvision  out  to  a  range  of  60  feet  and  can  see   invisible  creatures  and  objects  within  that  range.   Once  it  has  been  used,  it  can't  be  used  again  until  7   days  have  passed.      Serpentine  Owl  (Rare).  This  serpentine  statuette   of  an  owl  can  become  a  giant  owl  for  up  to  8  hours.   Once  it  has  been  used,  it  can't  be  used  again  until  2   days  have  passed.  The  owl  can  telepathically   communicate  with  you  at  any  range  if  you  and  it  are   on  the  same  plane  of  existence.      Silver  Raven  (Uncommon).  This  silver  statuette  of   a  raven  can  become  a  raven  for  up  to  12  hours.  Once  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

222+}  

it  has  been  used,  it  can't  be  used  again  until  2  days   have  passed.  While  in  raven  form,  the  figurine  allows   you  to  cast  the  animal  messenger  spell  on  it  at  will.  
Flame Tongue
Weapon  (any  sword),  rare  (requires  attunement)  
You  can  use  a  bonus  action  to  speak  this  magic   sword's  command  word,  causing  flames  to  erupt   from  the  blade.  These  flames  shed  bright  light  in  a   40-foot  radius  and  dim  light  for  an  additional  40  feet.   While  the  sword  is  ablaze,  it  deals  an  extra  2d6  fire   damage  to  any  target  it  hits.  The  flames  last  until  you   use  a  bonus  action  to  speak  the  command  word   again  or  until  you  drop  or  sheathe  the  sword.  
Folding Boat
Wondrous  item,  rare  
This  object  appears  as  a  wooden  box  that  measures   12  inches  long,  6  inches  wide,  and  6  inches  deep.  It   weighs  4  pounds  and  floats.  It  can  be  opened  to  store   items  inside.  This  item  also  has  three  command   words,  each  requiring  you  to  use  an  action  to  speak   it.      One  command  word  causes  the  box  to  unfold  into   a  boat  10  feet  long,  4  feet  wide,  and  2  feet  deep.  The   boat  has  one  pair  of  oars,  an  anchor,  a  mast,  and  a   lateen  sail.  The  boat  can  hold  up  to  four  Medium   creatures  comfortably.      The  second  command  word  causes  the  box  to   unfold  into  a  ship  24  feet  long,  8  feet  wide,  and  6  feet   deep.  The  ship  has  a  deck,  rowing  seats,  five  sets  of   oars,  a  steering  oar,  an  anchor,  a  deck  cabin,  and  a   mast  with  a  square  sail.  The  ship  can  hold  fifteen   Medium  creatures  comfortably.      When  the  box  becomes  a  vessel,  its  weight   becomes  that  of  a  normal  vessel  its  size,  and   anything  that  was  stored  in  the  box  remains  in  the   boat.      The  third  command  word  causes  the  folding  boat   to  fold  back  into  a  box,  provided  that  no  creatures   are  aboard.  Any  objects  in  the  vessel  that  can't  fit   inside  the  box  remain  outside  the  box  as  it  folds.  Any   objects  in  the  vessel  that  can  fit  inside  the  box  do  so.  
Frost Brand
Weapon  (any  sword),  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  
When  you  hit  with  an  attack  using  this  magic  sword,   the  target  takes  an  extra  1d6  cold  damage.  In   addition,  while  you  hold  the  sword,  you  have   resistance  to  fire  damage.  

   In  freezing  temperatures,  the  blade  sheds  bright   light  in  a  10-foot  radius  and  dim  light  for  an   additional  10  feet.      When  you  draw  this  weapon,  you  can  extinguish   all  nonmagical  flames  within  30  feet  of  you.  This   property  can  be  used  no  more  than  once  per  hour.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

226-]  
Gauntlets of Ogre Power
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
Your  Strength  score  is  19  while  you  wear  these   gauntlets.  They  have  no  effect  on  you  if  your   Strength  is  already  19  or  higher.  
Gem of Brightness
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
This  prism  has  50  charges.  While  you  are  holding  it,   you  can  use  an  action  to  speak  one  of  three   command  words  to  cause  one  of  the  following   effects:  
·   The  first  command  word  causes  the  gem  to  shed   bright  light  in  a  30-foot  radius  and  dim  light  for  an   additional  30  feet.  This  effect  doesn't  expend  a   charge.  It  lasts  until  you  use  a  bonus  action  to   repeat  the  command  word  or  until  you  use   another  function  of  the  gem.  
·   The  second  command  word  expends  1  charge  and   causes  the  gem  to  fire  a  brilliant  beam  of  light  at   one  creature  you  can  see  within  60  feet  of  you.  The   creature  must  succeed  on  a  DC  15  Constitution   saving  throw  or  become  blinded  for  1  minute.  The   creature  can  repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of   each  of  its  turns,  ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a   success.  
·   The  third  command  word  expends  5  charges  and   causes  the  gem  to  flare  with  blinding  light  in  a  30- foot  cone  originating  from  it.  Each  creature  in  the   cone  must  make  a  saving  throw  as  if  struck  by  the   beam  created  with  the  second  command  word.  
When  all  of  the  gem's  charges  are  expended,  the  gem   becomes  a  nonmagical  jewel  worth  50  gp.  
Gem of Seeing
Wondrous  item,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
This  gem  has  3  charges.  As  an  action,  you  can  speak   the  gem's  command  word  and  expend  1  charge.  For   the  next  10  minutes,  you  have  truesight  out  to  120   feet  when  you  peer  through  the  gem.      The  gem  regains  1d3  expended  charges  daily  at   dawn.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

223+}  

Giant Slayer
Weapon  (any  axe  or  sword),  rare  
You  gain  a  +1  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls   made  with  this  magic  weapon.      When  you  hit  a  giant  with  it,  the  giant  takes  an   extra  2d6  damage  of  the  weapon's  type  and  must   succeed  on  a  DC  15  Strength  saving  throw  or  fall   prone.  For  the  purpose  of  this  weapon,  "giant"  refers   to  any  creature  with  the  giant  type,  including  ettins   and  trolls.  
Glamoured Studded Leather
Armor  (studded  leather),  rare  
While  wearing  this  armor,  you  gain  a  +1  bonus  to  AC.   You  can  also  use  a  bonus  action  to  speak  the  armor's   command  word  and  cause  the  armor  to  assume  the   appearance  of  a  normal  set  of  clothing  or  some  other   kind  of  armor.  You  decide  what  it  looks  like,   including  color,  style,  and  accessories,  but  the  armor   retains  its  normal  bulk  and  weight.  The  illusory   appearance  lasts  until  you  use  this  property  again  or   remove  the  armor.  
Gloves of Missile Snaring
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
These  gloves  seem  to  almost  meld  into  your  hands   when  you  don  them.  When  a  ranged  weapon  attack   hits  you  while  you're  wearing  them,  you  can  use   your  reaction  to  reduce  the  damage  by  1d10  +  your   Dexterity  modifier,  provided  that  you  have  a  free   hand.  If  you  reduce  the  damage  to  0,  you  can  catch   the  missile  if  it  is  small  enough  for  you  to  hold  in  that   hand.  
Gloves of Swimming and Climbing
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  these  gloves,  climbing  and  swimming   don't  cost  you  extra  movement,  and  you  gain  a  +5   bonus  to  Strength  (Athletics)  checks  made  to  climb   or  swim.  
Goggles of Night
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
While  wearing  these  dark  lenses,  you  have   darkvision  out  to  a  range  of  60  feet.  If  you  already   have  darkvision,  wearing  the  goggles  increases  its   range  by  60  feet.  

Hammer of Thunderbolts
Weapon  (maul),  legendary  
You  gain  a  +1  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls   made  with  this  magic  weapon.      Giant's  Bane  (Requires  Attunement).  You  must   be  wearing  a  belt  of  giant  strength  (any  variety)  and   gauntlets  of  ogre  power  to  attune  to  this  weapon.  The   attunement  ends  if  you  take  off  either  of  those  items.   While  you  are  attuned  to  this  weapon  and  holding  it,   your  Strength  score  increases  by  4  and  can  exceed  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

227-]   20,  but  not  30.  When  you  roll  a  20  on  an  attack  roll   made  with  this  weapon  against  a  giant,  the  giant   must  succeed  on  a  DC  17  Constitution  saving  throw   or  die.      The  hammer  also  has  5  charges.  While  attuned  to   it,  you  can  expend  1  charge  and  make  a  ranged   weapon  attack  with  the  hammer,  hurling  it  as  if  it   had  the  thrown  property  with  a  normal  range  of  20   feet  and  a  long  range  of  60  feet.  If  the  attack  hits,  the   hammer  unleashes  a  thunderclap  audible  out  to  300   feet.  The  target  and  every  creature  within  30  feet  of   it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  17  Constitution  saving   throw  or  be  stunned  until  the  end  of  your  next  turn.   The  hammer  regains  1d4  +  1  expended  charges  daily   at  dawn.  
Handy Haversack
Wondrous  item,  rare  
This  backpack  has  a  central  pouch  and  two  side   pouches,  each  of  which  is  an  extradimensional  space.   Each  side  pouch  can  hold  up  to  20  pounds  of   material,  not  exceeding  a  volume  of  2  cubic  feet.  The   large  central  pouch  can  hold  up  to  8  cubic  feet  or  80   pounds  of  material.  The  backpack  always  weighs  5   pounds,  regardless  of  its  contents.      Placing  an  object  in  the  haversack  follows  the   normal  rules  for  interacting  with  objects.  Retrieving   an  item  from  the  haversack  requires  you  to  use  an   action.  When  you  reach  into  the  haversack  for  a   specific  item,  the  item  is  always  magically  on  top.      The  haversack  has  a  few  limitations.  If  it  is   overloaded,  or  if  a  sharp  object  pierces  it  or  tears  it,   the  haversack  ruptures  and  is  destroyed.  If  the   haversack  is  destroyed,  its  contents  are  lost  forever,   although  an  artifact  always  turns  up  again   somewhere.  If  the  haversack  is  turned  inside  out,  its   contents  spill  forth,  unharmed,  and  the  haversack   must  be  put  right  before  it  can  be  used  again.  If  a   breathing  creature  is  placed  within  the  haversack,   the  creature  can  survive  for  up  to  10  minutes,  after   which  time  it  begins  to  suffocate.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

224+}  

   Placing  the  haversack  inside  an  extradimensional   space  created  by  a  bag  of  holding,  portable  hole,  or   similar  item  instantly  destroys  both  items  and  opens   a  gate  to  the  Astral  Plane.  The  gate  originates  where   the  one  item  was  placed  inside  the  other.  Any   creature  within  10  feet  of  the  gate  is  sucked  through   it  and  deposited  in  a  random  location  on  the  Astral   Plane.  The  gate  then  closes.  The  gate  is  one-way  only   and  can't  be  reopened.  
Hat of Disguise
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  this  hat,  you  can  use  an  action  to  cast   the  disguise  self  spell  from  it  at  will.  The  spell  ends  if   the  hat  is  removed.  
Headband of Intellect
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
Your  Intelligence  score  is  19  while  you  wear  this   headband.  It  has  no  effect  on  you  if  your  Intelligence   is  already  19  or  higher.  
Helm of Brilliance
Wondrous  item,  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  
This  dazzling  helm  is  set  with  1d10  diamonds,  2d10   rubies,  3d10  fire  opals,  and  4d10  opals.  Any  gem   pried  from  the  helm  crumbles  to  dust.  When  all  the   gems  are  removed  or  destroyed,  the  helm  loses  its   magic.      You  gain  the  following  benefits  while  wearing  it:  
·   You  can  use  an  action  to  cast  one  of  the  following   spells  (save  DC  18),  using  one  of  the  helm's  gems   of  the  specified  type  as  a  component:  daylight   (opal),  fireball  (fire  opal),  prismatic  spray   (diamond),  or  wall  of  fire  (ruby).  The  gem  is   destroyed  when  the  spell  is  cast  and  disappears   from  the  helm.  
·   As  long  as  it  has  at  least  one  diamond,  the  helm   emits  dim  light  in  a  30-foot  radius  when  at  least   one  undead  is  within  that  area.  Any  undead  that   starts  its  turn  in  that  area  takes  1d6  radiant   damage.  
·   As  long  as  the  helm  has  at  least  one  ruby,  you  have   resistance  to  fire  damage.  
·   As  long  as  the  helm  has  at  least  one  fire  opal,  you   can  use  an  action  and  speak  a  command  word  to   cause  one  weapon  you  are  holding  to  burst  into   flames.  The  flames  emit  bright  light  in  a  10-foot   radius  and  dim  light  for  an  additional  10  feet.  The   flames  are  harmless  to  you  and  the  weapon.  When   you  hit  with  an  attack  using  the  blazing  weapon,  

the  target  takes  an  extra  1d6  fire  damage.  The   flames  last  until  you  use  a  bonus  action  to  speak   the  command  word  again  or  until  you  drop  or   stow  the  weapon.  
   Roll  a  d20  if  you  are  wearing  the  helm  and  take   fire  damage  as  a  result  of  failing  a  saving  throw   against  a  spell.  On  a  roll  of  1,  the  helm  emits  beams   of  light  from  its  remaining  gems.  Each  creature   within  60  feet  of  the  helm  other  than  you  must   succeed  on  a  DC  17  Dexterity  saving  throw  or  be  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

228-]   struck  by  a  beam,  taking  radiant  damage  equal  to  the   number  of  gems  in  the  helm.  The  helm  and  its  gems   are  then  destroyed.  
Helm of Comprehending Languages
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
While  wearing  this  helm,  you  can  use  an  action  to   cast  the  comprehend  languages  spell  from  it  at  will.  
Helm of Telepathy
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  this  helm,  you  can  use  an  action  to   cast  the  detect  thoughts  spell  (save  DC  13)  from  it.  As   long  as  you  maintain  concentration  on  the  spell,  you   can  use  a  bonus  action  to  send  a  telepathic  message   to  a  creature  you  are  focused  on.  It  can  reply--using   a  bonus  action  to  do  so--while  your  focus  on  it   continues.      While  focusing  on  a  creature  with  detect  thoughts,   you  can  use  an  action  to  cast  the  suggestion  spell   (save  DC  13)  from  the  helm  on  that  creature.  Once   used,  the  suggestion  property  can't  be  used  again   until  the  next  dawn.  
Helm of Teleportation
Wondrous  item,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
This  helm  has  3  charges.  While  wearing  it,  you  can   use  an  action  and  expend  1  charge  to  cast  the   teleport  spell  from  it.  The  helm  regains  1d3   expended  charges  daily  at  dawn.  
Holy Avenger
Weapon  (any  sword),  legendary  (requires  attunement   by  a  paladin)  
You  gain  a  +3  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls   made  with  this  magic  weapon.  When  you  hit  a  fiend   or  an  undead  with  it,  that  creature  takes  an  extra   2d10  radiant  damage.      While  you  hold  the  drawn  sword,  it  creates  an   aura  in  a  10-foot  radius  around  you.  You  and  all   creatures  friendly  to  you  in  the  aura  have  advantage  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

225+}  

on  saving  throws  against  spells  and  other  magical   effects.  If  you  have  17  or  more  levels  in  the  paladin   class,  the  radius  of  the  aura  increases  to  30  feet.  

Horn of Blasting
Wondrous  item,  rare  
You  can  use  an  action  to  speak  the  horn's  command   word  and  then  blow  the  horn,  which  emits  a   thunderous  blast  in  a  30-foot  cone  that  is  audible   600  feet  away.  Each  creature  in  the  cone  must  make   a  DC  15  Constitution  saving  throw.  On  a  failed  save,  a   creature  takes  5d6  thunder  damage  and  is  deafened   for  1  minute.  On  a  successful  save,  a  creature  takes   half  as  much  damage  and  isn't  deafened.  Creatures   and  objects  made  of  glass  or  crystal  have   disadvantage  on  the  saving  throw  and  take  10d6   thunder  damage  instead  of  5d6.      Each  use  of  the  horn's  magic  has  a  20  percent   chance  of  causing  the  horn  to  explode.  The  explosion   deals  10d6  fire  damage  to  the  blower  and  destroys   the  horn.  

Horn of Valhalla
Wondrous  item,  rare  (silver  or  brass),  very  rare  
(bronze),  or  legendary  (iron)  

You  can  use  an  action  to  blow  this  horn.  In  response,   warrior  spirits  from  the  Valhalla  appear  within  60   feet  of  you.  They  use  the  statistics  of  a  berserker.   They  return  to  Valhalla  after  1  hour  or  when  they   drop  to  0  hit  points.  Once  you  use  the  horn,  it  can't   be  used  again  until  7  days  have  passed.      Four  types  of  horn  of  Valhalla  are  known  to  exist,   each  made  of  a  different  metal.  The  horn's  type   determines  how  many  berserkers  answer  its   summons,  as  well  as  the  requirement  for  its  use.  The   GM  chooses  the  horn's  type  or  determines  it   randomly.  

d100   Horn   Berserkers   Requirement  

Type   Summoned  

01­40   Silver  

2d4  +  2   None  

41­75   Brass  

3d4  +  3   Proficiency  with  all  

simple  weapons  

76­90   Bronze   4d4  +  4   Proficiency  with  all  

medium  armor  

91­00   Iron  

5d4  +  5   Proficiency  with  all  

martial  weapons  

  

   If  you  blow  the  horn  without  meeting  its  

requirement,  the  summoned  berserkers  attack  you.  

If  you  meet  the  requirement,  they  are  friendly  to  you  

and  your  companions  and  follow  your  commands.  

Horseshoes of a Zephyr
Wondrous  item,  very  rare  
These  iron  horseshoes  come  in  a  set  of  four.  While   all  four  shoes  are  affixed  to  the  hooves  of  a  horse  or   similar  creature,  they  allow  the  creature  to  move   normally  while  floating  4  inches  above  the  ground.   This  effect  means  the  creature  can  cross  or  stand   above  nonsolid  or  unstable  surfaces,  such  as  water   or  lava.  The  creature  leaves  no  tracks  and  ignores   difficult  terrain.  In  addition,  the  creature  can  move  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

229-]   at  normal  speed  for  up  to  12  hours  a  day  without   suffering  exhaustion  from  a  forced  march.  
Horseshoes of Speed
Wondrous  item,  rare  
These  iron  horseshoes  come  in  a  set  of  four.  While   all  four  shoes  are  affixed  to  the  hooves  of  a  horse  or   similar  creature,  they  increase  the  creature's   walking  speed  by  30  feet.  
Immovable Rod
Rod,  uncommon  
This  flat  iron  rod  has  a  button  on  one  end.  You  can   use  an  action  to  press  the  button,  which  causes  the   rod  to  become  magically  fixed  in  place.  Until  you  or   another  creature  uses  an  action  to  push  the  button   again,  the  rod  doesn't  move,  even  if  it  is  defying   gravity.  The  rod  can  hold  up  to  8,000  pounds  of   weight.  More  weight  causes  the  rod  to  deactivate   and  fall.  A  creature  can  use  an  action  to  make  a  DC   30  Strength  check,  moving  the  fixed  rod  up  to  10  feet   on  a  success.  
Instant Fortress
Wondrous  item,  rare  
You  can  use  an  action  to  place  this  1-inch  metal  cube   on  the  ground  and  speak  its  command  word.  The   cube  rapidly  grows  into  a  fortress  that  remains  until   you  use  an  action  to  speak  the  command  word  that   dismisses  it,  which  works  only  if  the  fortress  is   empty.      The  fortress  is  a  square  tower,  20  feet  on  a  side   and  30  feet  high,  with  arrow  slits  on  all  sides  and  a   battlement  atop  it.  Its  interior  is  divided  into  two   floors,  with  a  ladder  running  along  one  wall  to   connect  them.  The  ladder  ends  at  a  trapdoor  leading   to  the  roof.  When  activated,  the  tower  has  a  small   door  on  the  side  facing  you.  The  door  opens  only  at   your  command,  which  you  can  speak  as  a  bonus   action.  It  is  immune  to  the  knock  spell  and  similar   magic,  such  as  that  of  a  chime  of  opening.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

226+}  

   Each  creature  in  the  area  where  the  fortress   appears  must  make  a  DC  15  Dexterity  saving  throw,   taking  10d10  bludgeoning  damage  on  a  failed  save,   or  half  as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.  In  either   case,  the  creature  is  pushed  to  an  unoccupied  space   outside  but  next  to  the  fortress.  Objects  in  the  area   that  aren't  being  worn  or  carried  take  this  damage   and  are  pushed  automatically.      The  tower  is  made  of  adamantine,  and  its  magic   prevents  it  from  being  tipped  over.  The  roof,  the   door,  and  the  walls  each  have  100  hit  points,   immunity  to  damage  from  nonmagical  weapons   excluding  siege  weapons,  and  resistance  to  all  other   damage.  Only  a  wish  spell  can  repair  the  fortress   (this  use  of  the  spell  counts  as  replicating  a  spell  of   8th  level  or  lower).  Each  casting  of  wish  causes  the   roof,  the  door,  or  one  wall  to  regain  50  hit  points.  
Ioun Stone
Wondrous  item,  rarity  varies  (requires  attunement)  
An  Ioun  stone  is  named  after  Ioun,  a  god  of   knowledge  and  prophecy  revered  on  some  worlds.   Many  types  of  Ioun  stone  exist,  each  type  a  distinct   combination  of  shape  and  color.      When  you  use  an  action  to  toss  one  of  these  stones   into  the  air,  the  stone  orbits  your  head  at  a  distance   of  1d3  feet  and  confers  a  benefit  to  you.  Thereafter,   another  creature  must  use  an  action  to  grasp  or  net   the  stone  to  separate  it  from  you,  either  by  making  a   successful  attack  roll  against  AC  24  or  a  successful   DC  24  Dexterity  (Acrobatics)  check.  You  can  use  an   action  to  seize  and  stow  the  stone,  ending  its  effect.      A  stone  has  AC  24,  10  hit  points,  and  resistance  to   all  damage.  It  is  considered  to  be  an  object  that  is   being  worn  while  it  orbits  your  head.      Absorption  (Very  Rare).  While  this  pale  lavender   ellipsoid  orbits  your  head,  you  can  use  your  reaction   to  cancel  a  spell  of  4th  level  or  lower  cast  by  a   creature  you  can  see  and  targeting  only  you.      Once  the  stone  has  canceled  20  levels  of  spells,  it   burns  out  and  turns  dull  gray,  losing  its  magic.  If  you   are  targeted  by  a  spell  whose  level  is  higher  than  the   number  of  spell  levels  the  stone  has  left,  the  stone   can't  cancel  it.      Agility  (Very  Rare).  Your  Dexterity  score   increases  by  2,  to  a  maximum  of  20,  while  this  deep   red  sphere  orbits  your  head.      Awareness  (Rare).  You  can't  be  surprised  while   this  dark  blue  rhomboid  orbits  your  head.      Fortitude  (Very  Rare).  Your  Constitution  score   increases  by  2,  to  a  maximum  of  20,  while  this  pink   rhomboid  orbits  your  head.  

   Greater  Absorption  (Legendary).  While  this   marbled  lavender  and  green  ellipsoid  orbits  your   head,  you  can  use  your  reaction  to  cancel  a  spell  of   8th  level  or  lower  cast  by  a  creature  you  can  see  and   targeting  only  you.      Once  the  stone  has  canceled  50  levels  of  spells,  it   burns  out  and  turns  dull  gray,  losing  its  magic.  If  you   are  targeted  by  a  spell  whose  level  is  higher  than  the   number  of  spell  levels  the  stone  has  left,  the  stone   can't  cancel  it.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

230-]      Insight  (Very  Rare).  Your  Wisdom  score   increases  by  2,  to  a  maximum  of  20,  while  this   incandescent  blue  sphere  orbits  your  head.      Intellect  (Very  Rare).  Your  Intelligence  score   increases  by  2,  to  a  maximum  of  20,  while  this   marbled  scarlet  and  blue  sphere  orbits  your  head.      Leadership  (Very  Rare).  Your  Charisma  score   increases  by  2,  to  a  maximum  of  20,  while  this   marbled  pink  and  green  sphere  orbits  your  head.      Mastery  (Legendary).  Your  proficiency  bonus   increases  by  1  while  this  pale  green  prism  orbits   your  head.      Protection  (Rare).  You  gain  a  +1  bonus  to  AC   while  this  dusty  rose  prism  orbits  your  head.      Regeneration  (Legendary).  You  regain  15  hit   points  at  the  end  of  each  hour  this  pearly  white   spindle  orbits  your  head,  provided  that  you  have  at   least  1  hit  point.      Reserve  (Rare).  This  vibrant  purple  prism  stores   spells  cast  into  it,  holding  them  until  you  use  them.   The  stone  can  store  up  to  3  levels  worth  of  spells  at  a   time.  When  found,  it  contains  1d4  -  1  levels  of   stored  spells  chosen  by  the  GM.      Any  creature  can  cast  a  spell  of  1st  through  3rd   level  into  the  stone  by  touching  it  as  the  spell  is  cast.   The  spell  has  no  effect,  other  than  to  be  stored  in  the   stone.  If  the  stone  can't  hold  the  spell,  the  spell  is   expended  without  effect.  The  level  of  the  slot  used  to   cast  the  spell  determines  how  much  space  it  uses.      While  this  stone  orbits  your  head,  you  can  cast  any   spell  stored  in  it.  The  spell  uses  the  slot  level,  spell   save  DC,  spell  attack  bonus,  and  spellcasting  ability   of  the  original  caster,  but  is  otherwise  treated  as  if   you  cast  the  spell.  The  spell  cast  from  the  stone  is  no   longer  stored  in  it,  freeing  up  space.      Strength  (Very  Rare).  Your  Strength  score   increases  by  2,  to  a  maximum  of  20,  while  this  pale   blue  rhomboid  orbits  your  head.      Sustenance  (Rare).  You  don't  need  to  eat  or  drink   while  this  clear  spindle  orbits  your  head.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

227+}  

Iron Bands of Binding
Wondrous  item,  rare  
This  rusty  iron  sphere  measures  3  inches  in   diameter  and  weighs  1  pound.  You  can  use  an  action   to  speak  the  command  word  and  throw  the  sphere  at   a  Huge  or  smaller  creature  you  can  see  within  60   feet  of  you.  As  the  sphere  moves  through  the  air,  it   opens  into  a  tangle  of  metal  bands.      Make  a  ranged  attack  roll  with  an  attack  bonus   equal  to  your  Dexterity  modifier  plus  your   proficiency  bonus.  On  a  hit,  the  target  is  restrained   until  you  take  a  bonus  action  to  speak  the  command   word  again  to  release  it.  Doing  so,  or  missing  with   the  attack,  causes  the  bands  to  contract  and  become   a  sphere  once  more.      A  creature,  including  the  one  restrained,  can  use   an  action  to  make  a  DC  20  Strength  check  to  break   the  iron  bands.  On  a  success,  the  item  is  destroyed,   and  the  restrained  creature  is  freed.  If  the  check  fails,   any  further  attempts  made  by  that  creature   automatically  fail  until  24  hours  have  elapsed.      Once  the  bands  are  used,  they  can't  be  used  again   until  the  next  dawn.  
Iron Flask
Wondrous  item,  legendary  
This  iron  bottle  has  a  brass  stopper.  You  can  use  an   action  to  speak  the  flask's  command  word,  targeting   a  creature  that  you  can  see  within  60  feet  of  you.  If   the  target  is  native  to  a  plane  of  existence  other  than   the  one  you're  on,  the  target  must  succeed  on  a  DC   17  Wisdom  saving  throw  or  be  trapped  in  the  flask.   If  the  target  has  been  trapped  by  the  flask  before,  it   has  advantage  on  the  saving  throw.  Once  trapped,  a   creature  remains  in  the  flask  until  released.  The  flask   can  hold  only  one  creature  at  a  time.  A  creature   trapped  in  the  flask  doesn't  need  to  breathe,  eat,  or   drink  and  doesn't  age.      You  can  use  an  action  to  remove  the  flask's   stopper  and  release  the  creature  the  flask  contains.   The  creature  is  friendly  to  you  and  your  companions   for  1  hour  and  obeys  your  commands  for  that   duration.  If  you  give  no  commands  or  give  it  a   command  that  is  likely  to  result  in  its  death,  it   defends  itself  but  otherwise  takes  no  actions.  At  the   end  of  the  duration,  the  creature  acts  in  accordance   with  its  normal  disposition  and  alignment.      An  identify  spell  reveals  that  a  creature  is  inside   the  flask,  but  the  only  way  to  determine  the  type  of   creature  is  to  open  the  flask.  A  newly  discovered   bottle  might  already  contain  a  creature  chosen  by   the  GM  or  determined  randomly.  

d100  
1 50  
51 54   55 58  
59 62  
63 64   65   66   67  
68 69  
70 73   74 75  
{+76 77  
78 83  
84 86   87 90  
91  
92 95   96  
97 99   100+}  

Contents   Empty  
Demon  (type  1)   Demon  (type  2)  
Demon  (type  3)  
Demon  (type  4)  
Demon  (type  5)   Demon  (type  6)   Deva   Devil  (greater)  
Devil  (lesser)   Djinni  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

231  

76 77  
78 83   84 86  
87 90   91  
92 95   96  
97 99   100-]  
Efreeti  
Elemental  (any)  
Invisible  stalker   Night  hag  
Planetar   Salamander  
Solar   Succubus/incubus  
Xorn  

Javelin of Lightning
Weapon  (javelin),  uncommon  
This  javelin  is  a  magic  weapon.  When  you  hurl  it  and   speak  its  command  word,  it  transforms  into  a  bolt  of   lightning,  forming  a  line  5  feet  wide  that  extends  out   from  you  to  a  target  within  120  feet.  Each  creature  in   the  line  excluding  you  and  the  target  must  make  a   DC  13  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  4d6  lightning   damage  on  a  failed  save,  and  half  as  much  damage  on   a  successful  one.  The  lightning  bolt  turns  back  into  a   javelin  when  it  reaches  the  target.  Make  a  ranged   weapon  attack  against  the  target.  On  a  hit,  the  target   takes  damage  from  the  javelin  plus  4d6  lightning   damage.      The  javelin's  property  can't  be  used  again  until  the   next  dawn.  In  the  meantime,  the  javelin  can  still  be   used  as  a  magic  weapon.  

Lantern of Revealing
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
While  lit,  this  hooded  lantern  burns  for  6  hours  on  1   pint  of  oil,  shedding  bright  light  in  a  30-foot  radius   and  dim  light  for  an  additional  30  feet.  Invisible   creatures  and  objects  are  visible  as  long  as  they  are   in  the  lantern's  bright  light.  You  can  use  an  action  to   lower  the  hood,  reducing  the  light  to  dim  light  in  a  5- foot  radius.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

228+}  

Luck Blade
Weapon  (any  sword),  legendary  (requires   attunement)  
You  gain  a  +1  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls   made  with  this  magic  weapon.  While  the  sword  is  on   your  person,  you  also  gain  a  +1  bonus  to  saving   throws.      Luck.  If  the  sword  is  on  your  person,  you  can  call   on  its  luck  (no  action  required)  to  reroll  one  attack   roll,  ability  check,  or  saving  throw  you  dislike.  You   must  use  the  second  roll.  This  property  can't  be  used   again  until  the  next  dawn.      Wish.  The  sword  has  1d4  ­  1  charges.  While   holding  it,  you  can  use  an  action  to  expend  1  charge   and  cast  the  wish  spell  from  it.  This  property  can't  be   used  again  until  the  next  dawn.  The  sword  loses  this   property  if  it  has  no  charges.  
Mace of Disruption
Weapon  (mace),  rare  (requires  attunement)  
When  you  hit  a  fiend  or  an  undead  with  this  magic   weapon,  that  creature  takes  an  extra  2d6  radiant   damage.  If  the  target  has  25  hit  points  or  fewer  after   taking  this  damage,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  15   Wisdom  saving  throw  or  be  destroyed.  On  a   successful  save,  the  creature  becomes  frightened  of   you  until  the  end  of  your  next  turn.      While  you  hold  this  weapon,  it  sheds  bright  light  in   a  20-foot  radius  and  dim  light  for  an  additional  20   feet.  
Mace of Smiting
Weapon  (mace),  rare  
You  gain  a  +1  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls   made  with  this  magic  weapon.  The  bonus  increases   to  +3  when  you  use  the  mace  to  attack  a  construct.      When  you  roll  a  20  on  an  attack  roll  made  with   this  weapon,  the  target  takes  an  extra  2d6   bludgeoning  damage,  or  4d6  bludgeoning  damage  if   it's  a  construct.  If  a  construct  has  25  hit  points  or   fewer  after  taking  this  damage,  it  is  destroyed.  
Mace of Terror
Weapon  (mace),  rare  (requires  attunement)  
This  magic  weapon  has  3  charges.  While  holding  it,   you  can  use  an  action  and  expend  1  charge  to  release   a  wave  of  terror.  Each  creature  of  your  choice  in  a   30-foot  radius  extending  from  you  must  succeed  on   a  DC  15  Wisdom  saving  throw  or  become  frightened   of  you  for  1  minute.  While  it  is  frightened  in  this  way,   a  creature  must  spend  its  turns  trying  to  move  as  far  

away  from  you  as  it  can,  and  it  can't  willingly  move   to  a  space  within  30  feet  of  you.  It  also  can't  take   reactions.  For  its  action,  it  can  use  only  the  Dash   action  or  try  to  escape  from  an  effect  that  prevents  it   from  moving.  If  it  has  nowhere  it  can  move,  the   creature  can  use  the  Dodge  action.  At  the  end  of  each   of  its  turns,  a  creature  can  repeat  the  saving  throw,   ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.      The  mace  regains  1d3  expended  charges  daily  at   dawn.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

232-]  

Mantle of Spell Resistance
Wondrous  item,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
You  have  advantage  on  saving  throws  against  spells   while  you  wear  this  cloak.  

Manual of Bodily Health
Wondrous  item,  very  rare  
This  book  contains  health  and  diet  tips,  and  its   words  are  charged  with  magic.  If  you  spend  48  hours   over  a  period  of  6  days  or  fewer  studying  the  book's   contents  and  practicing  its  guidelines,  your   Constitution  score  increases  by  2,  as  does  your   maximum  for  that  score.  The  manual  then  loses  its   magic,  but  regains  it  in  a  century.  

Manual of Gainful Exercise
Wondrous  item,  very  rare  
This  book  describes  fitness  exercises,  and  its  words   are  charged  with  magic.  If  you  spend  48  hours  over  a   period  of  6  days  or  fewer  studying  the  book's   contents  and  practicing  its  guidelines,  your  Strength   score  increases  by  2,  as  does  your  maximum  for  that   score.  The  manual  then  loses  its  magic,  but  regains  it   in  a  century.  

Manual of Golems
Wondrous  item,  very  rare  

This  tome  contains  information  and  incantations   necessary  to  make  a  particular  type  of  golem.  The   GM  chooses  the  type  or  determines  it  randomly.  To   decipher  and  use  the  manual,  you  must  be  a   spellcaster  with  at  least  two  5th-level  spell  slots.  A   creature  that  can't  use  a  manual  of  golems  and   attempts  to  read  it  takes  6d6  psychic  damage.  

d20   [-Golem   Time  

Cost-]   1­5   {+6­17   18   19­20  
  

Golem+}   Clay   {+Flesh   Iron   Stone  

Time+}   30  days   [-65,000  gp  

6­17   Flesh-]   60  days   [-50,000  gp  

18   Iron-]   120  days   [-100,000  gp  

19­20   Stone-]   90  days  

{+Cost   65,000  gp   50,000  gp   100,000  gp+}   80,000  gp  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

229+}  

   To  create  a  golem,  you  must  spend  the  time  shown   on  the  table,  working  without  interruption  with  the   manual  at  hand  and  resting  no  more  than  8  hours   per  day.  You  must  also  pay  the  specified  cost  to   purchase  supplies.      Once  you  finish  creating  the  golem,  the  book  is   consumed  in  eldritch  flames.  The  golem  becomes   animate  when  the  ashes  of  the  manual  are  sprinkled   on  it.  It  is  under  your  control,  and  it  understands  and   obeys  your  spoken  commands.  
Manual of Quickness of Action
Wondrous  item,  very  rare  
This  book  contains  coordination  and  balance   exercises,  and  its  words  are  charged  with  magic.  If   you  spend  48  hours  over  a  period  of  6  days  or  fewer   studying  the  book's  contents  and  practicing  its   guidelines,  your  Dexterity  score  increases  by  2,  as   does  your  maximum  for  that  score.  The  manual  then   loses  its  magic,  but  regains  it  in  a  century.  
Marvelous Pigments
Wondrous  item,  very  rare  
Typically  found  in  1d4  pots  inside  a  fine  wooden  box   with  a  brush  (weighing  1  pound  in  total),  these   pigments  allow  you  to  create  three-dimensional   objects  by  painting  them  in  two  dimensions.  The   paint  flows  from  the  brush  to  form  the  desired   object  as  you  concentrate  on  its  image.        Each  pot  of  paint  is  sufficient  to  cover  1,000   square  feet  of  a  surface,  which  lets  you  create   inanimate  objects  or  terrain  features--such  as  a   door,  a  pit,  flowers,  trees,  cells,  rooms,  or  weapons-- that  are  up  to  10,000  cubic  feet.  It  takes  10  minutes   to  cover  100  square  feet.      When  you  complete  the  painting,  the  object  or   terrain  feature  depicted  becomes  a  real,  nonmagical   object.  Thus,  painting  a  door  on  a  wall  creates  an   actual  door  that  can  be  opened  to  whatever  is   beyond.  Painting  a  pit  on  a  floor  creates  a  real  pit,   and  its  depth  counts  against  the  total  area  of  objects   you  create.      Nothing  created  by  the  pigments  can  have  a  value   greater  than  25  gp.  If  you  paint  an  object  of  greater   value  (such  as  a  diamond  or  a  pile  of  gold),  the  object   looks  authentic,  but  close  inspection  reveals  it  is   made  from  paste,  bone,  or  some  other  worthless   material.      If  you  paint  a  form  of  energy  such  as  fire  or   lightning,  the  energy  appears  but  dissipates  as  soon   as  you  complete  the  painting,  doing  no  harm  to   anything.  

Medallion of Thoughts
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
The  medallion  has  3  charges.  While  wearing  it,  you   can  use  an  action  and  expend  1  charge  to  cast  the   detect  thoughts  spell  (save  DC  13)  from  it.  The   medallion  regains  1d3  expended  charges  daily  at   dawn.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

233-]  
Mirror of Life Trapping
Wondrous  item,  very  rare  
When  this  4-foot-tall  mirror  is  viewed  indirectly,  its   surface  shows  faint  images  of  creatures.  The  mirror   weighs  50  pounds,  and  it  has  AC  11,  10  hit  points,   and  vulnerability  to  bludgeoning  damage.  It  shatters   and  is  destroyed  when  reduced  to  0  hit  points.      If  the  mirror  is  hanging  on  a  vertical  surface  and   you  are  within  5  feet  of  it,  you  can  use  an  action  to   speak  its  command  word  and  activate  it.  It  remains   activated  until  you  use  an  action  to  speak  the   command  word  again.      Any  creature  other  than  you  that  sees  its  reflection   in  the  activated  mirror  while  within  30  feet  of  it   must  succeed  on  a  DC  15  Charisma  saving  throw  or   be  trapped,  along  with  anything  it  is  wearing  or   carrying,  in  one  of  the  mirror's  twelve   extradimensional  cells.  This  saving  throw  is  made   with  advantage  if  the  creature  knows  the  mirror's   nature,  and  constructs  succeed  on  the  saving  throw   automatically.      An  extradimensional  cell  is  an  infinite  expanse   filled  with  thick  fog  that  reduces  visibility  to  10  feet.   Creatures  trapped  in  the  mirror's  cells  don't  age,  and   they  don't  need  to  eat,  drink,  or  sleep.  A  creature   trapped  within  a  cell  can  escape  using  magic  that   permits  planar  travel.  Otherwise,  the  creature  is   confined  to  the  cell  until  freed.        If  the  mirror  traps  a  creature  but  its  twelve   extradimensional  cells  are  already  occupied,  the   mirror  frees  one  trapped  creature  at  random  to   accommodate  the  new  prisoner.  A  freed  creature   appears  in  an  unoccupied  space  within  sight  of  the   mirror  but  facing  away  from  it.  If  the  mirror  is   shattered,  all  creatures  it  contains  are  freed  and   appear  in  unoccupied  spaces  near  it.      While  within  5  feet  of  the  mirror,  you  can  use  an   action  to  speak  the  name  of  one  creature  trapped  in   it  or  call  out  a  particular  cell  by  number.  The   creature  named  or  contained  in  the  named  cell   appears  as  an  image  on  the  mirror's  surface.  You  and   the  creature  can  then  communicate  normally.      In  a  similar  way,  you  can  use  an  action  to  speak  a   second  command  word  and  free  one  creature  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

230+}  

trapped  in  the  mirror.  The  freed  creature  appears,   along  with  its  possessions,  in  the  unoccupied  space   nearest  to  the  mirror  and  facing  away  from  it.  
Mithral Armor
Armor  (medium  or  heavy,  but  not  hide),  uncommon  
Mithral  is  a  light,  flexible  metal.  A  mithral  chain  shirt   or  breastplate  can  be  worn  under  normal  clothes.  If   the  armor  normally  imposes  disadvantage  on   Dexterity  (Stealth)  checks  or  has  a  Strength   requirement,  the  mithral  version  of  the  armor   doesn't.  
Necklace of Adaptation
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  this  necklace,  you  can  breathe   normally  in  any  environment,  and  you  have   advantage  on  saving  throws  made  against  harmful   gases  and  vapors  (such  as  cloudkill  and  stinking   cloud  effects,  inhaled  poisons,  and  the  breath   weapons  of  some  dragons).  
Necklace of Fireballs
Wondrous  item,  rare  
This  necklace  has  1d6  +  3  beads  hanging  from  it.  You   can  use  an  action  to  detach  a  bead  and  throw  it  up  to   60  feet  away.  When  it  reaches  the  end  of  its   trajectory,  the  bead  detonates  as  a  3rd-level  fireball   spell  (save  DC  15).      You  can  hurl  multiple  beads,  or  even  the  whole   necklace,  as  one  action.  When  you  do  so,  increase  the   level  of  the  fireball  by  1  for  each  bead  beyond  the   first.  
Necklace of Prayer Beads
Wondrous  item,  rare  (requires  attunement  by  a  cleric,   druid,  or  paladin)  
This  necklace  has  1d4  +  2  magic  beads  made  from   aquamarine,  black  pearl,  or  topaz.  It  also  has  many   nonmagical  beads  made  from  stones  such  as  amber,   bloodstone,  citrine,  coral,  jade,  pearl,  or  quartz.  If  a   magic  bead  is  removed  from  the  necklace,  that  bead   loses  its  magic.      Six  types  of  magic  beads  exist.  The  GM  decides  the   type  of  each  bead  on  the  necklace  or  determines  it   randomly.  A  necklace  can  have  more  than  one  bead   of  the  same  type.  To  use  one,  you  must  be  wearing   the  necklace.  Each  bead  contains  a  spell  that  you  can   cast  from  it  as  a  bonus  action  (using  your  spell  save   DC  if  a  save  is  necessary).  Once  a  magic  bead's  spell  

is  cast,  that  bead  can't  be  used  again  until  the  next   dawn.  

d20   1­6   7­12  

Bead  of  ...   Blessing   Curing  

13­16   17­18  
19   20  

Favor   Smiting   Summons   Wind   {+walking+}  

Spell   Bless   Cure  wounds  (2nd  level)  or  lesser   restoration   Greater  restoration   Branding  smite   Planar  ally   Wind  walk  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

234  

walking-]  

Nine Lives Stealer
Weapon  (any  sword),  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  
You  gain  a  +2  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls   made  with  this  magic  weapon.      The  sword  has  1d8  +  1  charges.  If  you  score  a   critical  hit  against  a  creature  that  has  fewer  than  100   hit  points,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  15  Constitution   saving  throw  or  be  slain  instantly  as  the  sword  tears   its  life  force  from  its  body  (a  construct  or  an  undead   is  immune).  The  sword  loses  1  charge  if  the  creature   is  slain.  When  the  sword  has  no  charges  remaining,   it  loses  this  property.  

Oathbow
Weapon  (longbow),  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  
When  you  nock  an  arrow  on  this  bow,  it  whispers  in   Elvish,  "Swift  defeat  to  my  enemies."  When  you  use   this  weapon  to  make  a  ranged  attack,  you  can,  as  a   command  phrase,  say,  "Swift  death  to  you  who  have   wronged  me."  The  target  of  your  attack  becomes   your  sworn  enemy  until  it  dies  or  until  dawn  seven   days  later.  You  can  have  only  one  such  sworn  enemy   at  a  time.  When  your  sworn  enemy  dies,  you  can   choose  a  new  one  after  the  next  dawn.      When  you  make  a  ranged  attack  roll  with  this   weapon  against  your  sworn  enemy,  you  have   advantage  on  the  roll.  In  addition,  your  target  gains   no  benefit  from  cover,  other  than  total  cover,  and   you  suffer  no  disadvantage  due  to  long  range.  If  the   attack  hits,  your  sworn  enemy  takes  an  extra  3d6   piercing  damage.      While  your  sworn  enemy  lives,  you  have   disadvantage  on  attack  rolls  with  all  other  weapons.  

Oil of Etherealness
Potion,  rare  
Beads  of  this  cloudy  gray  oil  form  on  the  outside  of   its  container  and  quickly  evaporate.  The  oil  can   cover  a  Medium  or  smaller  creature,  along  with  the   equipment  it's  wearing  and  carrying  (one  additional  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

231+}  

vial  is  required  for  each  size  category  above   Medium).  Applying  the  oil  takes  10  minutes.  The   affected  creature  then  gains  the  effect  of  the   etherealness  spell  for  1  hour.  
Oil of Sharpness
Potion,  very  rare  
This  clear,  gelatinous  oil  sparkles  with  tiny,  ultrathin   silver  shards.  The  oil  can  coat  one  slashing  or   piercing  weapon  or  up  to  5  pieces  of  slashing  or   piercing  ammunition.  Applying  the  oil  takes  1   minute.  For  1  hour,  the  coated  item  is  magical  and   has  a  +3  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls.  
Oil of Slipperiness
Potion,  uncommon  
This  sticky  black  unguent  is  thick  and  heavy  in  the   container,  but  it  flows  quickly  when  poured.  The  oil   can  cover  a  Medium  or  smaller  creature,  along  with   the  equipment  it's  wearing  and  carrying  (one   additional  vial  is  required  for  each  size  category   above  Medium).  Applying  the  oil  takes  10  minutes.   The  affected  creature  then  gains  the  effect  of  a   freedom  of  movement  spell  for  8  hours.      Alternatively,  the  oil  can  be  poured  on  the  ground   as  an  action,  where  it  covers  a  10-foot  square,   duplicating  the  effect  of  the  grease  spell  in  that  area   for  8  hours.  
Pearl of Power
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement  by  a   spellcaster)  
While  this  pearl  is  on  your  person,  you  can  use  an   action  to  speak  its  command  word  and  regain  one   expended  spell  slot.  If  the  expended  slot  was  of  4th   level  or  higher,  the  new  slot  is  3rd  level.  Once  you   use  the  pearl,  it  can t  be  used  again  until  the  next   dawn.  
Periapt of Health
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
You  are  immune  to  contracting  any  disease  while   you  wear  this  pendant.  If  you  are  already  infected   with  a  disease,  the  effects  of  the  disease  are   suppressed  you  while  you  wear  the  pendant.  
Periapt of Proof against Poison
Wondrous  item,  rare  
This  delicate  silver  chain  has  a  brilliant-cut  black   gem  pendant.  While  you  wear  it,  poisons  have  no  

effect  on  you.  You  are  immune  to  the  poisoned   condition  and  have  immunity  to  poison  damage.  
Periapt of Wound Closure
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
While  you  wear  this  pendant,  you  stabilize  whenever   you  are  dying  at  the  start  of  your  turn.  In  addition,   whenever  you  roll  a  Hit  Die  to  regain  hit  points,   double  the  number  of  hit  points  it  restores.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

235-]  
Philter of Love
Potion,  uncommon  
The  next  time  you  see  a  creature  within  10  minutes   after  drinking  this  philter,  you  become  charmed  by   that  creature  for  1  hour.  If  the  creature  is  of  a  species   and  gender  you  are  normally  attracted  to,  you   regard  it  as  your  true  love  while  you  are  charmed.   This  potion's  rose-hued,  effervescent  liquid  contains   one  easy-to-miss  bubble  shaped  like  a  heart.  
Pipes of Haunting
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
You  must  be  proficient  with  wind  instruments  to  use   these  pipes.  They  have  3  charges.  You  can  use  an   action  to  play  them  and  expend  1  charge  to  create  an   eerie,  spellbinding  tune.  Each  creature  within  30  feet   of  you  that  hears  you  play  must  succeed  on  a  DC  15   Wisdom  saving  throw  or  become  frightened  of  you   for  1  minute.  If  you  wish,  all  creatures  in  the  area   that  aren't  hostile  toward  you  automatically  succeed   on  the  saving  throw.  A  creature  that  fails  the  saving   throw  can  repeat  it  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,   ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  A  creature   that  succeeds  on  its  saving  throw  is  immune  to  the   effect  of  these  pipes  for  24  hours.  The  pipes  regain   1d3  expended  charges  daily  at  dawn.  
Pipes of the Sewers
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
You  must  be  proficient  with  wind  instruments  to  use   these  pipes.  While  you  are  attuned  to  the  pipes,   ordinary  rats  and  giant  rats  are  indifferent  toward   you  and  will  not  attack  you  unless  you  threaten  or   harm  them.      The  pipes  have  3  charges.  If  you  play  the  pipes  as   an  action,  you  can  use  a  bonus  action  to  expend  1  to   3  charges,  calling  forth  one  swarm  of  rats  with  each   expended  charge,  provided  that  enough  rats  are   within  half  a  mile  of  you  to  be  called  in  this  fashion   (as  determined  by  the  GM).  If  there  aren't  enough   rats  to  form  a  swarm,  the  charge  is  wasted.  Called  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

232+}  

swarms  move  toward  the  music  by  the  shortest   available  route  but  aren't  under  your  control   otherwise.  The  pipes  regain  1d3  expended  charges   daily  at  dawn.      Whenever  a  swarm  of  rats  that  isn't  under  another   creature's  control  comes  within  30  feet  of  you  while   you  are  playing  the  pipes,  you  can  make  a  Charisma   check  contested  by  the  swarm's  Wisdom  check.  If   you  lose  the  contest,  the  swarm  behaves  as  it   normally  would  and  can't  be  swayed  by  the  pipes'   music  for  the  next  24  hours.  If  you  win  the  contest,   the  swarm  is  swayed  by  the  pipes'  music  and   becomes  friendly  to  you  and  your  companions  for  as   long  as  you  continue  to  play  the  pipes  each  round  as   an  action.  A  friendly  swarm  obeys  your  commands.  If   you  issue  no  commands  to  a  friendly  swarm,  it   defends  itself  but  otherwise  takes  no  actions.  If  a   friendly  swarm  starts  its  turn  and  can't  hear  the   pipes'  music,  your  control  over  that  swarm  ends,  and   the  swarm  behaves  as  it  normally  would  and  can't  be   swayed  by  the  pipes'  music  for  the  next  24  hours.  
Plate Armor of Etherealness
Armor  (plate),  legendary  (requires  attunement)  
While  you're  wearing  this  armor,  you  can  speak  its   command  word  as  an  action  to  gain  the  effect  of  the   etherealness  spell,  which  last  for  10  minutes  or  until   you  remove  the  armor  or  use  an  action  to  speak  the   command  word  again.  This  property  of  the  armor   can't  be  used  again  until  the  next  dawn.  
Portable Hole
Wondrous  item,  rare  
This  fine  black  cloth,  soft  as  silk,  is  folded  up  to  the   dimensions  of  a  handkerchief.  It  unfolds  into  a   circular  sheet  6  feet  in  diameter.      You  can  use  an  action  to  unfold  a  portable  hole  and   place  it  on  or  against  a  solid  surface,  whereupon  the   portable  hole  creates  an  extradimensional  hole  10   feet  deep.  The  cylindrical  space  within  the  hole   exists  on  a  different  plane,  so  it  can't  be  used  to   create  open  passages.  Any  creature  inside  an  open   portable  hole  can  exit  the  hole  by  climbing  out  of  it.      You  can  use  an  action  to  close  a  portable  hole  by   taking  hold  of  the  edges  of  the  cloth  and  folding  it  up.   Folding  the  cloth  closes  the  hole,  and  any  creatures   or  objects  within  remain  in  the  extradimensional   space.  No  matter  what's  in  it,  the  hole  weighs  next  to   nothing.      If  the  hole  is  folded  up,  a  creature  within  the  hole's   extradimensional  space  can  use  an  action  to  make  a   DC  10  Strength  check.  On  a  successful  check,  the  

creature  forces  its  way  out  and  appears  within  5  feet   of  the  portable  hole  or  the  creature  carrying  it.  A   breathing  creature  within  a  closed  portable  hole  can   survive  for  up  to  10  minutes,  after  which  time  it   begins  to  suffocate.      Placing  a  portable  hole  inside  an  extradimensional   space  created  by  a  bag  of  holding,  handy  haversack,   or  similar  item  instantly  destroys  both  items  and   opens  a  gate  to  the  Astral  Plane.  The  gate  originates   where  the  one  item  was  placed  inside  the  other.  Any   creature  within  10  feet  of  the  gate  is  sucked  through  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

236-]   it  and  deposited  in  a  random  location  on  the  Astral   Plane.  The  gate  then  closes.  The  gate  is  one-way  only   and  can't  be  reopened.  
Potion of Animal Friendship
Potion,  uncommon  
When  you  drink  this  potion,  you  can  cast  the  animal   friendship  spell  (save  DC  13)  for  1  hour  at  will.   Agitating  this  muddy  liquid  brings  little  bits  into   view:  a  fish  scale,  a  hummingbird  tongue,  a  cat  claw,   or  a  squirrel  hair.  
Potion of Clairvoyance
Potion,  rare  
When  you  drink  this  potion,  you  gain  the  effect  of  the   clairvoyance  spell.  An  eyeball  bobs  in  this  yellowish   liquid  but  vanishes  when  the  potion  is  opened.  
Potion of Climbing
Potion,  common  
When  you  drink  this  potion,  you  gain  a  climbing   speed  equal  to  your  walking  speed  for  1  hour.   During  this  time,  you  have  advantage  on  Strength   (Athletics)  checks  you  make  to  climb.  The  potion  is   separated  into  brown,  silver,  and  gray  layers   resembling  bands  of  stone.  Shaking  the  bottle  fails  to   mix  the  colors.  
Potion of Diminution
Potion,  rare  
When  you  drink  this  potion,  you  gain  the  "reduce"   effect  of  the  enlarge/reduce  spell  for  1d4  hours  (no   concentration  required).  The  red  in  the  potion's   liquid  continuously  contracts  to  a  tiny  bead  and  then   expands  to  color  the  clear  liquid  around  it.  Shaking   the  bottle  fails  to  interrupt  this  process.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

233+}  

Potion of Flying
Potion,  very  rare  
When  you  drink  this  potion,  you  gain  a  flying  speed   equal  to  your  walking  speed  for  1  hour  and  can   hover.  If  you're  in  the  air  when  the  potion  wears  off,   you  fall  unless  you  have  some  other  means  of  staying   aloft.  This  potion's  clear  liquid  floats  at  the  top  of  its   container  and  has  cloudy  white  impurities  drifting  in   it.  

Potion of Gaseous Form
Potion,  rare  
When  you  drink  this  potion,  you  gain  the  effect  of  the   gaseous  form  spell  for  1  hour  (no  concentration   required)  or  until  you  end  the  effect  as  a  bonus   action.  This  potion's  container  seems  to  hold  fog  that   moves  and  pours  like  water.  

Potion of Giant Strength
Potion,  rarity  varies  

When  you  drink  this  potion,  your  Strength  score   changes  for  1  hour.  The  type  of  giant  determines  the   score  (see  the  table  below).  The  potion  has  no  effect   on  you  if  your  Strength  is  equal  to  or  greater  than   that  score.      This  potion's  transparent  liquid  has  floating  in  it  a   sliver  of  fingernail  from  a  giant  of  the  appropriate   type.  The  potion  of  frost  giant  strength  and  the  potion   of  stone  giant  strength  have  the  same  effect.  

Type  of  Giant   Hill  giant   Frost/stone  giant   Fire  giant   Cloud  giant   Storm  giant  

Strength   21   23   25   27   29  

Rarity   Uncommon   Rare   Rare   Very  rare   Legendary  

Potion of Growth
Potion,  uncommon  
When  you  drink  this  potion,  you  gain  the  "enlarge"   effect  of  the  enlarge/reduce  spell  for  1d4  hours  (no   concentration  required).  The  red  in  the  potion's   liquid  continuously  expands  from  a  tiny  bead  to   color  the  clear  liquid  around  it  and  then  contracts.   Shaking  the  bottle  fails  to  interrupt  this  process.  

Potion of Healing
Potion,  rarity  varies  
You  regain  hit  points  when  you  drink  this  potion.   The  number  of  hit  points  depends  on  the  potion's   rarity,  as  shown  in  the  Potions  of  Healing  table.  

Whatever  its  potency,  the  potion's  red  liquid   glimmers  when  agitated.  

Potions  of  Healing  

Potion  of  ...   Healing   Greater  healing   Superior  healing   Supreme  healing  

Rarity   Common   Uncommon   Rare   Very  rare  

HP  Regained   2d4  +  2   4d4  +  4   8d4  +  8   10d4  +  20  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

237-]  

Potion of Heroism
Potion,  rare  
For  1  hour  after  drinking  it,  you  gain  10  temporary   hit  points  that  last  for  1  hour.  For  the  same  duration,   you  are  under  the  effect  of  the  bless  spell  (no   concentration  required).  This  blue  potion  bubbles   and  steams  as  if  boiling.  

Potion of Invisibility
Potion,  very  rare  
This  potion's  container  looks  empty  but  feels  as   though  it  holds  liquid.  When  you  drink  it,  you   become  invisible  for  1  hour.  Anything  you  wear  or   carry  is  invisible  with  you.  The  effect  ends  early  if   you  attack  or  cast  a  spell.  

Potion of Mind Reading
Potion,  rare  
When  you  drink  this  potion,  you  gain  the  effect  of  the   detect  thoughts  spell  (save  DC  13).  The  potion's   dense,  purple  liquid  has  an  ovoid  cloud  of  pink   floating  in  it.  

Potion of Poison
Potion,  uncommon  
This  concoction  looks,  smells,  and  tastes  like  a  potion   of  healing  or  other  beneficial  potion.  However,  it  is   actually  poison  masked  by  illusion  magic.  An  identify   spell  reveals  its  true  nature.      If  you  drink  it,  you  take  3d6  poison  damage,  and   you  must  succeed  on  a  DC  13  Constitution  saving   throw  or  be  poisoned.  At  the  start  of  each  of  your   turns  while  you  are  poisoned  in  this  way,  you  take   3d6  poison  damage.  At  the  end  of  each  of  your  turns,   you  can  repeat  the  saving  throw.  On  a  successful   save,  the  poison  damage  you  take  on  your   subsequent  turns  decreases  by  1d6.  The  poison  ends   when  the  damage  decreases  to  0.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

234+}  

Potion of Resistance
Potion,  uncommon  

When  you  drink  this  potion,  you  gain  resistance  to   one  type  of  damage  for  1  hour.  The  GM  chooses  the   type  or  determines  it  randomly  from  the  options   below.  

d10   Damage  Type      d10   Damage  Type  

1   Acid  

   6   Necrotic  

2   Cold  

   7   Poison  

3   Fire  

   8   Psychic  

4   Force  

   9   Radiant  

5   Lightning  

   10   Thunder  

Potion of Speed
Potion,  very  rare  
When  you  drink  this  potion,  you  gain  the  effect  of  the   haste  spell  for  1  minute  (no  concentration  required).   The  potion's  yellow  fluid  is  streaked  with  black  and   swirls  on  its  own.  

Potion of Water Breathing
Potion,  uncommon  
You  can  breathe  underwater  for  1  hour  after   drinking  this  potion.  Its  cloudy  green  fluid  smells  of   the  sea  and  has  a  jellyfish-like  bubble  floating  in  it.  

Restorative Ointment
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
This  glass  jar,  3  inches  in  diameter,  contains  1d4  +  1   doses  of  a  thick  mixture  that  smells  faintly  of  aloe.   The  jar  and  its  contents  weigh  1/2  pound.      As  an  action,  one  dose  of  the  ointment  can  be   swallowed  or  applied  to  the  skin.  The  creature  that   receives  it  regains  2d8  +  2  hit  points,  ceases  to  be   poisoned,  and  is  cured  of  any  disease.  

Ring of Animal Influence
Ring,  rare  
This  ring  has  3  charges,  and  it  regains  1d3  expended   charges  daily  at  dawn.  While  wearing  the  ring,  you   can  use  an  action  to  expend  1  of  its  charges  to  cast   one  of  the  following  spells:  

·   Animal  friendship  (save  DC  13)   ·   Fear  (save  DC  13),  targeting  only  beasts  that  have  
an  Intelligence  of  3  or  lower   ·   Speak  with  animals  

Ring of Djinni Summoning
Ring,  legendary  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  this  ring,  you  can  speak  its  command   word  as  an  action  to  summon  a  particular  djinni   from  the  Elemental  Plane  of  Air.  The  djinni  appears   in  an  unoccupied  space  you  choose  within  120  feet   of  you.  It  remains  as  long  as  you  concentrate  (as  if   concentrating  on  a  spell),  to  a  maximum  of  1  hour,  or   until  it  drops  to  0  hit  points.  It  then  returns  to  its   home  plane.      While  summoned,  the  djinni  is  friendly  to  you  and   your  companions.  It  obeys  any  commands  you  give  it,   no  matter  what  language  you  use.  If  you  fail  to  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

238-]   command  it,  the  djinni  defends  itself  against   attackers  but  takes  no  other  actions.      After  the  djinni  departs,  it  can't  be  summoned   again  for  24  hours,  and  the  ring  becomes  nonmagical   if  the  djinni  dies.  
Ring of Elemental Command
Ring,  legendary  (requires  attunement)  
This  ring  is  linked  to  one  of  the  four  Elemental   Planes.  The  GM  chooses  or  randomly  determines  the   linked  plane.      While  wearing  this  ring,  you  have  advantage  on   attack  rolls  against  elementals  from  the  linked  plane,   and  they  have  disadvantage  on  attack  rolls  against   you.  In  addition,  you  have  access  to  properties  based   on  the  linked  plane.      The  ring  has  5  charges.  It  regains  1d4  +  1   expended  charges  daily  at  dawn.  Spells  cast  from  the   ring  have  a  save  DC  of  17.      Ring  of  Air  Elemental  Command.  You  can  expend   2  of  the  ring's  charges  to  cast  dominate  monster  on   an  air  elemental.  In  addition,  when  you  fall,  you   descend  60  feet  per  round  and  take  no  damage  from   falling.  You  can  also  speak  and  understand  Auran.      If  you  help  slay  an  air  elemental  while  attuned  to   the  ring,  you  gain  access  to  the  following  additional   properties:  
·   You  have  resistance  to  lightning  damage.   ·   You  have  a  flying  speed  equal  to  your  walking  
speed  and  can  hover.   ·   You  can  cast  the  following  spells  from  the  ring,  
expending  the  necessary  number  of  charges:  chain   lightning  (3  charges),  gust  of  wind  (2  charges),  or   wind  wall  (1  charge).  
   Ring  of  Earth  Elemental  Command.  You  can   expend  2  of  the  ring's  charges  to  cast  dominate   monster  on  an  earth  elemental.  In  addition,  you  can   move  in  difficult  terrain  that  is  composed  of  rubble,   [-rocks,-]  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print+}  or  [-dirt  as  if  it  were  normal  terrain.-]  {+photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

235  

rocks,  or  dirt  as  if  it  were  normal  terrain.+}  You  can   also  speak  and  understand  Terran.      If  you  help  slay  an  earth  elemental  while  attuned   to  the  ring,  you  gain  access  to  the  following   additional  properties:  
·   You  have  resistance  to  acid  damage.   ·   You  can  move  through  solid  earth  or  rock  as  if  
those  areas  were  difficult  terrain.  If  you  end  your   turn  there,  you  are  shunted  out  to  the  nearest   unoccupied  space  you  last  occupied.   ·   You  can  cast  the  following  spells  from  the  ring,   expending  the  necessary  number  of  charges:  stone   shape  (2  charges),  stoneskin  (3  charges),  or  wall  of   stone  (3  charges).  
   Ring  of  Fire  Elemental  Command.  You  can   expend  2  of  the  ring's  charges  to  cast  dominate   monster  on  a  fire  elemental.  In  addition,  you  have   resistance  to  fire  damage.  You  can  also  speak  and   understand  Ignan.      If  you  help  slay  a  fire  elemental  while  attuned  to   the  ring,  you  gain  access  to  the  following  additional   properties:  
·   You  are  immune  to  fire  damage.   ·   You  can  cast  the  following  spells  from  the  ring,  
expending  the  necessary  number  of  charges:   burning  hands  (1  charge),  fireball  (2  charges),  and   wall  of  fire  (3  charges).  
   Ring  of  Water  Elemental  Command.  You  can   expend  2  of  the  ring's  charges  to  cast  dominate   monster  on  a  water  elemental.  In  addition,  you  can   stand  on  and  walk  across  liquid  surfaces  as  if  they   were  solid  ground.  You  can  also  speak  and   understand  Aquan.      If  you  help  slay  a  water  elemental  while  attuned  to   the  ring,  you  gain  access  to  the  following  additional   properties:  
·   You  can  breathe  underwater  and  have  a   swimming  speed  equal  to  your  walking  speed.  
·   You  can  cast  the  following  spells  from  the  ring,   expending  the  necessary  number  of  charges:   create  or  destroy  water  (1  charge),  control  water  (3   charges),  ice  storm  (2  charges),  or  wall  of  ice  (3   charges).  
Ring of Evasion
Ring,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
This  ring  has  3  charges,  and  it  regains  1d3  expended   charges  daily  at  dawn.  When  you  fail  a  Dexterity   saving  throw  while  wearing  it,  you  can  use  your  

reaction  to  expend  1  of  its  charges  to  succeed  on  that   saving  throw  instead.  
Ring of Feather Falling
Ring,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
When  you  fall  while  wearing  this  ring,  you  descend   60  feet  per  round  and  take  no  damage  from  falling.  
Ring of Free Action
Ring,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
While  you  wear  this  ring,  difficult  terrain  doesn't   cost  you  extra  movement.  In  addition,  magic  can  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

239-]   neither  reduce  your  speed  nor  cause  you  to  be   paralyzed  or  restrained.  
Ring of Invisibility
Ring,  legendary  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  this  ring,  you  can  turn  invisible  as  an   action.  Anything  you  are  wearing  or  carrying  is   invisible  with  you.  You  remain  invisible  until  the   ring  is  removed,  until  you  attack  or  cast  a  spell,  or   until  you  use  a  bonus  action  to  become  visible  again.  
Ring of Jumping
Ring,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  this  ring,  you  can  cast  the  jump  spell   from  it  as  a  bonus  action  at  will,  but  can  target  only   yourself  when  you  do  so.  
Ring of Mind Shielding
Ring,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  this  ring,  you  are  immune  to  magic   that  allows  other  creatures  to  read  your  thoughts,   determine  whether  you  are  lying,  know  your   alignment,  or  know  your  creature  type.  Creatures   can  telepathically  communicate  with  you  only  if  you   allow  it.      You  can  use  an  action  to  cause  the  ring  to  become   invisible  until  you  use  another  action  to  make  it   visible,  until  you  remove  the  ring,  or  until  you  die.      If  you  die  while  wearing  the  ring,  your  soul  enters   it,  unless  it  already  houses  a  soul.  You  can  remain  in   the  ring  or  depart  for  the  afterlife.  As  long  as  your   soul  is  in  the  ring,  you  can  telepathically   communicate  with  any  creature  wearing  it.  A  wearer   can't  prevent  this  telepathic  communication.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

236+}  

Ring of Protection
Ring,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
You  gain  a  +1  bonus  to  AC  and  saving  throws  while   wearing  this  ring.  

Ring of Regeneration
Ring,  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  this  ring,  you  regain  1d6  hit  points   every  10  minutes,  provided  that  you  have  at  least  1   hit  point.  If  you  lose  a  body  part,  the  ring  causes  the   missing  part  to  regrow  and  return  to  full   functionality  after  1d6  +  1  days  if  you  have  at  least  1   hit  point  the  whole  time.  

Ring of Resistance
Ring,  rare  (requires  attunement)  

You  have  resistance  to  one  damage  type  while   wearing  this  ring.  The  gem  in  the  ring  indicates  the   type,  which  the  GM  chooses  or  determines  randomly.  

d10   Damage  Type   Gem  

1   Acid  

Pearl  

2   Cold  

Tourmaline  

3   Fire  

Garnet  

4   Force  

Sapphire  

5   Lightning  

Citrine  

6   Necrotic  

Jet  

7   Poison  

Amethyst  

8   Psychic  

Jade  

9   Radiant  

Topaz  

10   Thunder  

Spinel  

Ring of Shooting Stars
Ring,  very  rare  (requires  attunement  outdoors  at   night)  
While  wearing  this  ring  in  dim  light  or  darkness,  you   can  cast  dancing  lights  and  light  from  the  ring  at  will.   Casting  either  spell  from  the  ring  requires  an  action.      The  ring  has  6  charges  for  the  following  other   properties.  The  ring  regains  1d6  expended  charges   daily  at  dawn.      Faerie  Fire.  You  can  expend  1  charge  as  an  action   to  cast  faerie  fire  from  the  ring.      Ball  Lightning.  You  can  expend  2  charges  as  an   action  to  create  one  to  four  3-foot-diameter  spheres   of  lightning.  The  more  spheres  you  create,  the  less   powerful  each  sphere  is  individually.      Each  sphere  appears  in  an  unoccupied  space  you   can  see  within  120  feet  of  you.  The  spheres  last  as   long  as  you  concentrate  (as  if  concentrating  on  a   spell),  up  to  1  minute.  Each  sphere  sheds  dim  light  in   a  30-foot  radius.  

   As  a  bonus  action,  you  can  move  each  sphere  up  to   30  feet,  but  no  farther  than  120  feet  away  from  you.   When  a  creature  other  than  you  comes  within  5  feet   of  a  sphere,  the  sphere  discharges  lightning  at  that   creature  and  disappears.  That  creature  must  make  a   DC  15  Dexterity  saving  throw.  On  a  failed  save,  the   creature  takes  lightning  damage  based  on  the   number  of  spheres  you  created.  
Spheres   [-4   3   2   1-]   Lightning  Damage   {+4+}   2d4   {+3+}   2d6   {+2+}   5d4   {+1+}   4d12  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

240-]  
      Shooting  Stars.  You  can  expend  1  to  3  charges  as   an  action.  For  every  charge  you  expend,  you  launch  a   glowing  mote  of  light  from  the  ring  at  a  point  you   can  see  within  60  feet  of  you.  Each  creature  within  a   15-foot  cube  originating  from  that  point  is  showered   in  sparks  and  must  make  a  DC  15  Dexterity  saving   throw,  taking  5d4  fire  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or   half  as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Ring of Spell Storing
Ring,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
This  ring  stores  spells  cast  into  it,  holding  them  until   the  attuned  wearer  uses  them.  The  ring  can  store  up   to  5  levels  worth  of  spells  at  a  time.  When  found,  it   contains  1d6  -  1  levels  of  stored  spells  chosen  by  the   GM.      Any  creature  can  cast  a  spell  of  1st  through  5th   level  into  the  ring  by  touching  the  ring  as  the  spell  is   cast.  The  spell  has  no  effect,  other  than  to  be  stored   in  the  ring.  If  the  ring  can't  hold  the  spell,  the  spell  is   expended  without  effect.  The  level  of  the  slot  used  to   cast  the  spell  determines  how  much  space  it  uses.      While  wearing  this  ring,  you  can  cast  any  spell   stored  in  it.  The  spell  uses  the  slot  level,  spell  save   DC,  spell  attack  bonus,  and  spellcasting  ability  of  the   original  caster,  but  is  otherwise  treated  as  if  you  cast   the  spell.  The  spell  cast  from  the  ring  is  no  longer   stored  in  it,  freeing  up  space.  
Ring of Spell Turning
Ring,  legendary  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  this  ring,  you  have  advantage  on   saving  throws  against  any  spell  that  targets  only  you   (not  in  an  area  of  effect).  In  addition,  if  you  roll  a  20   for  the  save  and  the  spell  is  7th  level  or  lower,  the   spell  has  no  effect  on  you  and  instead  targets  the   caster,  using  the  slot  level,  spell  save  DC,  attack   bonus,  and  spellcasting  ability  of  the  caster.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

237+}  

Ring of Swimming
Ring,  uncommon  
You  have  a  swimming  speed  of  40  feet  while  wearing   this  ring.  
Ring of Telekinesis
Ring,  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  this  ring,  you  can  cast  the  telekinesis   spell  at  will,  but  you  can  target  only  objects  that   aren't  being  worn  or  carried.  
Ring of the Ram
Ring,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
This  ring  has  3  charges,  and  it  regains  1d3  expended   charges  daily  at  dawn.  While  wearing  the  ring,  you   can  use  an  action  to  expend  1  to  3  of  its  charges  to   attack  one  creature  you  can  see  within  60  feet  of  you.   The  ring  produces  a  spectral  ram's  head  and  makes   its  attack  roll  with  a  +7  bonus.  On  a  hit,  for  each   charge  you  spend,  the  target  takes  2d10  force   damage  and  is  pushed  5  feet  away  from  you.      Alternatively,  you  can  expend  1  to  3  of  the  ring's   charges  as  an  action  to  try  to  break  an  object  you  can   see  within  60  feet  of  you  that  isn't  being  worn  or   carried.  The  ring  makes  a  Strength  check  with  a  +5   bonus  for  each  charge  you  spend.  
Ring of Three Wishes
Ring,  legendary  
While  wearing  this  ring,  you  can  use  an  action  to   expend  1  of  its  3  charges  to  cast  the  wish  spell  from   it.  The  ring  becomes  nonmagical  when  you  use  the   last  charge.  
Ring of Warmth
Ring,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  this  ring,  you  have  resistance  to  cold   damage.  In  addition,  you  and  everything  you  wear   and  carry  are  unharmed  by  temperatures  as  low  as   -50  degrees  Fahrenheit.  
Ring of Water Walking
Ring,  uncommon  
While  wearing  this  ring,  you  can  stand  on  and  move   across  any  liquid  surface  as  if  it  were  solid  ground.  
Ring of X-ray Vision
Ring,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  this  ring,  you  can  use  an  action  to   speak  its  command  word.  When  you  do  so,  you  can  

see  into  and  through  solid  matter  for  1  minute.  This   vision  has  a  radius  of  30  feet.  To  you,  solid  objects   within  that  radius  appear  transparent  and  don't   prevent  light  from  passing  through  them.  The  vision   can  penetrate  1  foot  of  stone,  1  inch  of  common   metal,  or  up  to  3  feet  of  wood  or  dirt.  Thicker   substances  block  the  vision,  as  does  a  thin  sheet  of   lead.      Whenever  you  use  the  ring  again  before  taking  a   long  rest,  you  must  succeed  on  a  DC  15  Constitution   saving  throw  or  gain  one  level  of  exhaustion.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

241-]  
Robe of Eyes
Wondrous  item,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
This  robe  is  adorned  with  eyelike  patterns.  While   you  wear  the  robe,  you  gain  the  following  benefits:  
·   The  robe  lets  you  see  in  all  directions,  and  you   have  advantage  on  Wisdom  (Perception)  checks   that  rely  on  sight.  
·   You  have  darkvision  out  to  a  range  of  120  feet.   ·   You  can  see  invisible  creatures  and  objects,  as  well  
as  see  into  the  Ethereal  Plane,  out  to  a  range  of   120  feet.  
   The  eyes  on  the  robe  can't  be  closed  or  averted.   Although  you  can  close  or  avert  your  own  eyes,  you   are  never  considered  to  be  doing  so  while  wearing   this  robe.      A  light  spell  cast  on  the  robe  or  a  daylight  spell   cast  within  5  feet  of  the  robe  causes  you  to  be   blinded  for  1  minute.  At  the  end  of  each  of  your   turns,  you  can  make  a  Constitution  saving  throw  (DC   11  for  light  or  DC  15  for  daylight),  ending  the   blindness  on  a  success.  
Robe of Scintillating Colors
Wondrous  item,  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  
This  robe  has  3  charges,  and  it  regains  1d3  expended   charges  daily  at  dawn.  While  you  wear  it,  you  can   use  an  action  and  expend  1  charge  to  cause  the   garment  to  display  a  shifting  pattern  of  dazzling   hues  until  the  end  of  your  next  turn.  During  this  time,   the  robe  sheds  bright  light  in  a  30-foot  radius  and   dim  light  for  an  additional  30  feet.  Creatures  that  can   see  you  have  disadvantage  on  attack  rolls  against   you.  In  addition,  any  creature  in  the  bright  light  that   can  see  you  when  the  robe's  power  is  activated  must   succeed  on  a  DC  15  Wisdom  saving  throw  or  become   stunned  until  the  effect  ends.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

238+}  

Robe of Stars
Wondrous  item,  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  
This  black  or  dark  blue  robe  is  embroidered  with   small  white  or  silver  stars.  You  gain  a  +1  bonus  to   saving  throws  while  you  wear  it.      Six  stars,  located  on  the  robe's  upper  front  portion,   are  particularly  large.  While  wearing  this  robe,  you   can  use  an  action  to  pull  off  one  of  the  stars  and  use   it  to  cast  magic  missile  as  a  5th-level  spell.  Daily  at   dusk,  1d6  removed  stars  reappear  on  the  robe.      While  you  wear  the  robe,  you  can  use  an  action  to   enter  the  Astral  Plane  along  with  everything  you  are   wearing  and  carrying.  You  remain  there  until  you   use  an  action  to  return  to  the  plane  you  were  on.  You   reappear  in  the  last  space  you  occupied,  or  if  that   space  is  occupied,  the  nearest  unoccupied  space.  
Robe of the Archmagi
Wondrous  item,  legendary  (requires  attunement  by  a   sorcerer,  warlock,  or  wizard)  
This  elegant  garment  is  made  from  exquisite  cloth  of   white,  gray,  or  black  and  adorned  with  silvery  runes.   The  robe's  color  corresponds  to  the  alignment  for   which  the  item  was  created.  A  white  robe  was  made   for  good,  gray  for  neutral,  and  black  for  evil.  You   can't  attune  to  a  robe  of  the  archmagi  that  doesn't   correspond  to  your  alignment.      You  gain  these  benefits  while  wearing  the  robe:  
·   If  you  aren't  wearing  armor,  your  base  Armor   Class  is  15  +  your  Dexterity  modifier.  
·   You  have  advantage  on  saving  throws  against   spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
·   Your  spell  save  DC  and  spell  attack  bonus  each   increase  by  2.  
Robe of Useful Items
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
This  robe  has  cloth  patches  of  various  shapes  and   colors  covering  it.  While  wearing  the  robe,  you  can   use  an  action  to  detach  one  of  the  patches,  causing  it   to  become  the  object  or  creature  it  represents.  Once   the  last  patch  is  removed,  the  robe  becomes  an   ordinary  garment.      The  robe  has  two  of  each  of  the  following  patches:  
·   Dagger   ·   Bullseye  lantern  (filled  and  lit)   ·   Steel  mirror   ·   10-foot  pole   ·   Hempen  rope  (50  feet,  coiled)   ·   Sack  

   In  addition,  the  robe  has  4d4  other  patches.  The   GM  chooses  the  patches  or  determines  them   randomly.  

d100   01­08   09­15  
16­22  
23­30   31­44   45­51   {+52­59   60­68   69­75   76­83  
84­90   91­96  
97­00+}  

Patch   Bag  of  100  gp   Silver  coffer  (1  foot  long,  6  inches  wide  and   deep)  worth  500  gp   Iron  door  (up  to  10  feet  wide  and  10  feet  high,   barred  on  one  side  of  your  choice),  which  you   can  place  in  an  opening  you  can  reach;  it   conforms  to  fit  the  opening,  attaching  and   hinging  itself   10  gems  worth  100  gp  each   Wooden  ladder  (24  feet  long)   A  riding  horse  with  saddle  bags  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

242  

52­59  
60­68   69­75   76­83  
84­90   91­96  
97­00-]   Pit  (a  cube  10  feet  on  a  side),  which  you  can   place  on  the  ground  within  10  feet  of  you   4  potions  of  healing   Rowboat  (12  feet  long)   Spell  scroll  containing  one  spell  of  1st  to  3rd   level   2  mastiffs  
Window  (2  feet  by  4  feet,  up  to  2  feet  deep),   which  you  can  place  on  a  vertical  surface  you   can  reach   Portable  ram  

Rod of Absorption
Rod,  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  
While  holding  this  rod,  you  can  use  your  reaction  to   absorb  a  spell  that  is  targeting  only  you  and  not  with   an  area  of  effect.  The  absorbed  spell's  effect  is   canceled,  and  the  spell's  energy--not  the  spell   itself--is  stored  in  the  rod.  The  energy  has  the  same   level  as  the  spell  when  it  was  cast.  The  rod  can   absorb  and  store  up  to  50  levels  of  energy  over  the   course  of  its  existence.  Once  the  rod  absorbs  50   levels  of  energy,  it  can't  absorb  more.  If  you  are   targeted  by  a  spell  that  the  rod  can't  store,  the  rod   has  no  effect  on  that  spell.      When  you  become  attuned  to  the  rod,  you  know   how  many  levels  of  energy  the  rod  has  absorbed   over  the  course  of  its  existence,  and  how  many  levels   of  spell  energy  it  currently  has  stored.      If  you  are  a  spellcaster  holding  the  rod,  you  can   convert  energy  stored  in  it  into  spell  slots  to  cast   spells  you  have  prepared  or  know.  You  can  create   spell  slots  only  of  a  level  equal  to  or  lower  than  your   own  spell  slots,  up  to  a  maximum  of  5th  level.  You   use  the  stored  levels  in  place  of  your  slots,  but   otherwise  cast  the  spell  as  normal.  For  example,  you   can  use  3  levels  stored  in  the  rod  as  a  3rd-level  spell   slot.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

239+}  

   A  newly  found  rod  has  1d10  levels  of  spell  energy   stored  in  it  already.  A  rod  that  can  no  longer  absorb   spell  energy  and  has  no  energy  remaining  becomes   nonmagical.  
Rod of Alertness
Rod,  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  
This  rod  has  a  flanged  head  and  the  following   properties.      Alertness.  While  holding  the  rod,  you  have   advantage  on  Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  and  on   rolls  for  initiative.      Spells.  While  holding  the  rod,  you  can  use  an   action  to  cast  one  of  the  following  spells  from  it:   detect  evil  and  good,  detect  magic,  detect  poison  and   disease,  or  see  invisibility.      Protective  Aura.  As  an  action,  you  can  plant  the   haft  end  of  the  rod  in  the  ground,  whereupon  the   rod's  head  sheds  bright  light  in  a  60-foot  radius  and   dim  light  for  an  additional  60  feet.  While  in  that   bright  light,  you  and  any  creature  that  is  friendly  to   you  gain  a  +1  bonus  to  AC  and  saving  throws  and  can   sense  the  location  of  any  invisible  hostile  creature   that  is  also  in  the  bright  light.      The  rod's  head  stops  glowing  and  the  effect  ends   after  10  minutes,  or  when  a  creature  uses  an  action   to  pull  the  rod  from  the  ground.  This  property  can't   be  used  again  until  the  next  dawn.  
Rod of Lordly Might
Rod,  legendary  (requires  attunement)  
This  rod  has  a  flanged  head,  and  it  functions  as  a   magic  mace  that  grants  a  +3  bonus  to  attack  and   damage  rolls  made  with  it.  The  rod  has  properties   associated  with  six  different  buttons  that  are  set  in  a   row  along  the  haft.  It  has  three  other  properties  as   well,  detailed  below.      Six  Buttons.  You  can  press  one  of  the  rod's  six   buttons  as  a  bonus  action.  A  button's  effect  lasts   until  you  push  a  different  button  or  until  you  push   the  same  button  again,  which  causes  the  rod  to   revert  to  its  normal  form.      If  you  press  button  1,  the  rod  becomes  a  flame   tongue,  as  a  fiery  blade  sprouts  from  the  end   opposite  the  rod's  flanged  head.      If  you  press  button  2,  the  rod's  flanged  head  folds   down  and  two  crescent-shaped  blades  spring  out,   transforming  the  rod  into  a  magic  battleaxe  that   grants  a  +3  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls  made   with  it.      If  you  press  button  3,  the  rod's  flanged  head  folds   down,  a  spear  point  springs  from  the  rod's  tip,  and  

the  rod's  handle  lengthens  into  a  6-foot  haft,   transforming  the  rod  into  a  magic  spear  that  grants  a   +3  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls  made  with  it.      If  you  press  button  4,  the  rod  transforms  into  a   climbing  pole  up  to  50  feet  long,  as  you  specify.  In   surfaces  as  hard  as  granite,  a  spike  at  the  bottom  and   three  hooks  at  the  top  anchor  the  pole.  Horizontal   bars  3  inches  long  fold  out  from  the  sides,  1  foot   apart,  forming  a  ladder.  The  pole  can  bear  up  to   4,000  pounds.  More  weight  or  lack  of  solid   anchoring  causes  the  rod  to  revert  to  its  normal   form.      If  you  press  button  5,  the  rod  transforms  into  a   handheld  battering  ram  and  grants  its  user  a  +10  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

243-]   bonus  to  Strength  checks  made  to  break  through   doors,  barricades,  and  other  barriers.      If  you  press  button  6,  the  rod  assumes  or  remains   in  its  normal  form  and  indicates  magnetic  north.   (Nothing  happens  if  this  function  of  the  rod  is  used   in  a  location  that  has  no  magnetic  north.)  The  rod   also  gives  you  knowledge  of  your  approximate  depth   beneath  the  ground  or  your  height  above  it.      Drain  Life.  When  you  hit  a  creature  with  a  melee   attack  using  the  rod,  you  can  force  the  target  to   make  a  DC  17  Constitution  saving  throw.  On  a  failure,   the  target  takes  an  extra  4d6  necrotic  damage,  and   you  regain  a  number  of  hit  points  equal  to  half  that   necrotic  damage.  This  property  can't  be  used  again   until  the  next  dawn.      Paralyze.  When  you  hit  a  creature  with  a  melee   attack  using  the  rod,  you  can  force  the  target  to   make  a  DC  17  Strength  saving  throw.  On  a  failure,   the  target  is  paralyzed  for  1  minute.  The  target  can   repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its   turns,  ending  the  effect  on  a  success.  This  property   can't  be  used  again  until  the  next  dawn.      Terrify.  While  holding  the  rod,  you  can  use  an   action  to  force  each  creature  you  can  see  within  30   feet  of  you  to  make  a  DC  17  Wisdom  saving  throw.   On  a  failure,  a  target  is  frightened  of  you  for  1   minute.  A  frightened  target  can  repeat  the  saving   throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending  the   effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  This  property  can't  be   used  again  until  the  next  dawn.  
Rod of Rulership
Rod,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
You  can  use  an  action  to  present  the  rod  and   command  obedience  from  each  creature  of  your   choice  that  you  can  see  within  120  feet  of  you.  Each   target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  15  Wisdom  saving   throw  or  be  charmed  by  you  for  8  hours.  While   charmed  in  this  way,  the  creature  regards  you  as  its  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

240+}  

trusted  leader.  If  harmed  by  you  or  your  companions,   or  commanded  to  do  something  contrary  to  its   nature,  a  target  ceases  to  be  charmed  in  this  way.   The  rod  can't  be  used  again  until  the  next  dawn.  
Rod of Security
Rod,  very  rare  
While  holding  this  rod,  you  can  use  an  action  to   activate  it.  The  rod  then  instantly  transports  you  and   up  to  199  other  willing  creatures  you  can  see  to  a   paradise  that  exists  in  an  extraplanar  space.  You   choose  the  form  that  the  paradise  takes.  It  could  be  a   tranquil  garden,  lovely  glade,  cheery  tavern,   immense  palace,  tropical  island,  fantastic  carnival,  or   whatever  else  you  can  imagine.  Regardless  of  its   nature,  the  paradise  contains  enough  water  and  food   to  sustain  its  visitors.  Everything  else  that  can  be   interacted  with  inside  the  extraplanar  space  can   exist  only  there.  For  example,  a  flower  picked  from  a   garden  in  the  paradise  disappears  if  it  is  taken   outside  the  extraplanar  space.      For  each  hour  spent  in  the  paradise,  a  visitor   regains  hit  points  as  if  it  had  spent  1  Hit  Die.  Also,   creatures  don't  age  while  in  the  paradise,  although   time  passes  normally.  Visitors  can  remain  in  the   paradise  for  up  to  200  days  divided  by  the  number   of  creatures  present  (round  down).      When  the  time  runs  out  or  you  use  an  action  to   end  it,  all  visitors  reappear  in  the  location  they   occupied  when  you  activated  the  rod,  or  an   unoccupied  space  nearest  that  location.  The  rod   can't  be  used  again  until  ten  days  have  passed.  
Rope of Climbing
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
This  60-foot  length  of  silk  rope  weighs  3  pounds  and   can  hold  up  to  3,000  pounds.  If  you  hold  one  end  of   the  rope  and  use  an  action  to  speak  the  command   word,  the  rope  animates.  As  a  bonus  action,  you  can   command  the  other  end  to  move  toward  a   destination  you  choose.  That  end  moves  10  feet  on   your  turn  when  you  first  command  it  and  10  feet  on   each  of  your  turns  until  reaching  its  destination,  up   to  its  maximum  length  away,  or  until  you  tell  it  to   stop.  You  can  also  tell  the  rope  to  fasten  itself   securely  to  an  object  or  to  unfasten  itself,  to  knot  or   unknot  itself,  or  to  coil  itself  for  carrying.      If  you  tell  the  rope  to  knot,  large  knots  appear  at  1- foot  intervals  along  the  rope.  While  knotted,  the  rope   shortens  to  a  50-foot  length  and  grants  advantage  on   checks  made  to  climb  it.  

   The  rope  has  AC  20  and  20  hit  points.  It  regains  1   hit  point  every  5  minutes  as  long  as  it  has  at  least  1   hit  point.  If  the  rope  drops  to  0  hit  points,  it  is   destroyed.  
Rope of Entanglement
Wondrous  item,  rare  
This  rope  is  30  feet  long  and  weighs  3  pounds.  If  you   hold  one  end  of  the  rope  and  use  an  action  to  speak   its  command  word,  the  other  end  darts  forward  to   entangle  a  creature  you  can  see  within  20  feet  of  you.   The  target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  15  Dexterity  saving   throw  or  become  restrained.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

244-]      You  can  release  the  creature  by  using  a  bonus   action  to  speak  a  second  command  word.  A  target   restrained  by  the  rope  can  use  an  action  to  make  a   DC  15  Strength  or  Dexterity  check  (target's  choice).   On  a  success,  the  creature  is  no  longer  restrained  by   the  rope.      The  rope  has  AC  20  and  20  hit  points.  It  regains  1   hit  point  every  5  minutes  as  long  as  it  has  at  least  1   hit  point.  If  the  rope  drops  to  0  hit  points,  it  is   destroyed.  
Scarab of Protection
Wondrous  item,  legendary  (requires  attunement)  
If  you  hold  this  beetle-shaped  medallion  in  your   hand  for  1  round,  an  inscription  appears  on  its   surface  revealing  its  magical  nature.  It  provides  two   benefits  while  it  is  on  your  person:  
·   You  have  advantage  on  saving  throws  against   spells.  
·   The  scarab  has  12  charges.  If  you  fail  a  saving   throw  against  a  necromancy  spell  or  a  harmful   effect  originating  from  an  undead  creature,  you   can  use  your  reaction  to  expend  1  charge  and  turn   the  failed  save  into  a  successful  one.  The  scarab   crumbles  into  powder  and  is  destroyed  when  its   last  charge  is  expended.  
Scimitar of Speed
Weapon  (scimitar),  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  
You  gain  a  +2  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls   made  with  this  magic  weapon.  In  addition,  you  can   make  one  attack  with  it  as  a  bonus  action  on  each  of   your  turns.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

241+}  

Shield, +1, +2, or +3
Armor  (shield),  uncommon  (+1),  rare  (+2),  or  very   rare  (+3)  
While  holding  this  shield,  you  have  a  bonus  to  AC   determined  by  the  shield's  rarity.  This  bonus  is  in   addition  to  the  shield's  normal  bonus  to  AC.  
Shield of Missile Attraction
Armor  (shield),  rare  (requires  attunement)  
While  holding  this  shield,  you  have  resistance  to   damage  from  ranged  weapon  attacks.      Curse.  This  shield  is  cursed.  Attuning  to  it  curses   you  until  you  are  targeted  by  the  remove  curse  spell   or  similar  magic.  Removing  the  shield  fails  to  end  the   curse  on  you.  Whenever  a  ranged  weapon  attack  is   made  against  a  target  within  10  feet  of  you,  the  curse   causes  you  to  become  the  target  instead.  
Slippers of Spider Climbing
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
While  you  wear  these  light  shoes,  you  can  move  up,   down,  and  across  vertical  surfaces  and  upside  down   along  ceilings,  while  leaving  your  hands  free.  You   have  a  climbing  speed  equal  to  your  walking  speed.   However,  the  slippers  don't  allow  you  to  move  this   way  on  a  slippery  surface,  such  as  one  covered  by  ice   or  oil.  
Sovereign Glue
Wondrous  item,  legendary  
This  viscous,  milky-white  substance  can  form  a   permanent  adhesive  bond  between  any  two  objects.   It  must  be  stored  in  a  jar  or  flask  that  has  been   coated  inside  with  oil  of  slipperiness.  When  found,  a   container  contains  1d6  +  1  ounces.      One  ounce  of  the  glue  can  cover  a  1-foot  square   surface.  The  glue  takes  1  minute  to  set.  Once  it  has   done  so,  the  bond  it  creates  can  be  broken  only  by   the  application  of  universal  solvent  or  oil  of   etherealness,  or  with  a  wish  spell.  
Spell Scroll
Scroll,  varies  
A  spell  scroll  bears  the  words  of  a  single  spell,   written  in  a  mystical  cipher.  If  the  spell  is  on  your   class's  spell  list,  you  can  [-use  an  action  to-]  read  the  scroll  and  cast  its   spell  without  [-having  to  provide-]  {+providing+}  any  [-of  the  spell's-]  {+material+}  components.   Otherwise,  the  scroll  is  unintelligible.  {+Casting  the   spell  by  reading  the  scroll  requires  the  spell's  normal   casting  time.  Once  the  spell  is  cast,  the  words  on  the  

scroll  fade,  and  it  crumbles  to  dust.  If  the  casting  is   interrupted,  the  scroll  is  not  lost.+}      If  the  spell  is  on  your  [-class s-]  {+class's+}  spell  list  but  of  a   higher  level  than  you  can  normally  cast,  you  must   make  an  ability  check  using  your  spellcasting  ability   to  determine  whether  you  cast  it  successfully.  The   DC  equals  10  +  the  [-spell s-]  {+spell's+}  level.  On  a  failed  check,  the   spell  disappears  from  the  scroll  with  no  other  effect.    [-Once  the  spell  is  cast,  the  words  on  the  scroll  fade,   and  the  scroll  itself  crumbles  to  dust.-]      The  level  of  the  spell  on  the  scroll  determines  the   spell's  saving  throw  DC  and  attack  bonus,  as  well  as   the  scroll's  rarity,  as  shown  in  the  Spell  Scroll  table.     

Spell  Scroll  

Spell  Level   [-Cantrip   1st   2nd   3rd   4th   5th   6th-]   Rarity   [-Common   Common   Uncommon   Uncommon   Rare   Rare   Very  rare-]  

Save  DC   [-13   13   13   15   15   17   17-]   Attack  Bonus  

{+Cantrip   Common  

13+}  

+5  

{+1st  

Common  

13+}  

+5  

{+2nd   Uncommon   13+}  

+5  

{+3rd   Uncommon   15+}  

+7  

{+4th   Rare  

15+}   +7  

{+5th   Rare  

17+}   +9  

{+6th  

Very  rare  

17+}  

+9  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

245-]  

7th  

Very  rare  

18  

+10  

8th  

Very  rare  

18  

+10  

9th  

Legendary  

19  

+11  

  

   A  wizard  spell  on  a  spell  scroll  can  be  copied  just  as  

spells  in  spellbooks  can  be  copied.  When  a  spell  is  

copied  from  a  spell  scroll,  the  copier  must  succeed  on  

an  Intelligence  (Arcana)  check  with  a  DC  equal  to  10  

+  the  spell's  level.  If  the  check  succeeds,  the  spell  is  

successfully  copied.  Whether  the  check  succeeds  or  

fails,  the  spell  scroll  is  destroyed.    

Spellguard Shield
Armor  (shield),  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  
While  holding  this  shield,  you  have  advantage  on   saving  throws  against  spells  and  other  magical   effects,  and  spell  attacks  have  disadvantage  against   you.  

Sphere of Annihilation
Wondrous  item,  legendary  
This  2-foot-diameter  black  sphere  is  a  hole  in  the   multiverse,  hovering  in  space  and  stabilized  by  a   magical  field  surrounding  it.      The  sphere  obliterates  all  matter  it  passes  through   and  all  matter  that  passes  through  it.  Artifacts  are   the  exception.  Unless  an  artifact  is  susceptible  to   damage  from  a  sphere  of  annihilation,  it  passes   through  the  sphere  unscathed.  Anything  else  that   touches  the  sphere  but  isn't  wholly  engulfed  and   obliterated  by  it  takes  4d10  force  damage.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

242+}  

   The  sphere  is  stationary  until  someone  controls  it.   If  you  are  within  60  feet  of  an  uncontrolled  sphere,   you  can  use  an  action  to  make  a  DC  25  Intelligence   (Arcana)  check.  On  a  success,  the  sphere  levitates  in   one  direction  of  your  choice,  up  to  a  number  of  feet   equal  to  5  ×  your  Intelligence  modifier  (minimum  5   feet).  On  a  failure,  the  sphere  moves  10  feet  toward   you.  A  creature  whose  space  the  sphere  enters  must   succeed  on  a  DC  13  Dexterity  saving  throw  or  be   touched  by  it,  taking  4d10  force  damage.      If  you  attempt  to  control  a  sphere  that  is  under   another  creature's  control,  you  make  an  Intelligence   (Arcana)  check  contested  by  the  other  creature's   Intelligence  (Arcana)  check.  The  winner  of  the   contest  gains  control  of  the  sphere  and  can  levitate  it   as  normal.      If  the  sphere  comes  into  contact  with  a  planar   portal,  such  as  that  created  by  the  gate  spell,  or  an   extradimensional  space,  such  as  that  within  a   portable  hole,  the  GM  determines  randomly  what   happens,  using  the  following  table.  

d100   01­50   51­85  
86­00  

Result   The  sphere  is  destroyed.   The  sphere  moves  through  the  portal  or  into   the  extradimensional  space.   A  spatial  rift  sends  each  creature  and  object   within  180  feet  of  the  sphere,  including  the   sphere,  to  a  random  plane  of  existence.  

Staff of Charming
Staff,  rare  (requires  attunement  by  a  bard,  cleric,   druid,  sorcerer,  warlock,  or  wizard)  
While  holding  this  staff,  you  can  use  an  action  to   expend  1  of  its  10  charges  to  cast  charm  person,   command,  or  comprehend  languages  from  it  using   your  spell  save  DC.  The  staff  can  also  be  used  as  a   magic  quarterstaff.      If  you  are  holding  the  staff  and  fail  a  saving  throw   against  an  enchantment  spell  that  targets  only  you,   you  can  turn  your  failed  save  into  a  successful  one.   You  can't  use  this  property  of  the  staff  again  until  the   next  dawn.  If  you  succeed  on  a  save  against  an   enchantment  spell  that  targets  only  you,  with  or   without  the  staff's  intervention,  you  can  use  your   reaction  to  expend  1  charge  from  the  staff  and  turn   the  spell  back  on  its  caster  as  if  you  had  cast  the  spell.      The  staff  regains  1d8  +  2  expended  charges  daily   at  dawn.  If  you  expend  the  last  charge,  roll  a  d20.  On   a  1,  the  staff  becomes  a  nonmagical  quarterstaff.  

Staff of Fire
Staff,  very  rare  (requires  attunement  by  a  druid,   sorcerer,  warlock,  or  wizard)  
You  have  resistance  to  fire  damage  while  you  hold   this  staff.      The  staff  has  10  charges.  While  holding  it,  you  can   use  an  action  to  expend  1  or  more  of  its  charges  to   cast  one  of  the  following  spells  from  it,  using  your   spell  save  DC:  burning  hands  (1  charge),  fireball  (3   charges),  or  wall  of  fire  (4  charges).      The  staff  regains  1d6  +  4  expended  charges  daily   at  dawn.  If  you  expend  the  last  charge,  roll  a  d20.  On   a  1,  the  staff  blackens,  crumbles  into  cinders,  and  is   destroyed.  
Staff of Frost
Staff,  very  rare  (requires  attunement  by  a  druid,   sorcerer,  warlock,  or  wizard)  
You  have  resistance  to  cold  damage  while  you  hold   this  staff.      The  staff  has  10  charges.  While  holding  it,  you  can   use  an  action  to  expend  1  or  more  of  its  charges  to   cast  one  of  the  following  spells  from  it,  using  your  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

246-]   spell  save  DC:  cone  of  cold  (5  charges),  fog  cloud  (1   charge),  ice  storm  (4  charges),  or  wall  of  ice  (4   charges).      The  staff  regains  1d6  +  4  expended  charges  daily   at  dawn.  If  you  expend  the  last  charge,  roll  a  d20.  On   a  1,  the  staff  turns  to  water  and  is  destroyed.  
Staff of Healing
Staff,  rare  (requires  attunement  by  a  bard,  cleric,  or   druid)  
This  staff  has  10  charges.  While  holding  it,  you  can   use  an  action  to  expend  1  or  more  of  its  charges  to   cast  one  of  the  following  spells  from  it,  using  your   spell  save  DC  and  spellcasting  ability  modifier:  cure   wounds  (1  charge  per  spell  level,  up  to  4th),  lesser   restoration  (2  charges),  or  mass  cure  wounds  (5   charges).      The  staff  regains  1d6  +  4  expended  charges  daily   at  dawn.  If  you  expend  the  last  charge,  roll  a  d20.  On   a  1,  the  staff  vanishes  in  a  flash  of  light,  lost  forever.  
Staff of Power
Staff,  very  rare  (requires  attunement  by  a  sorcerer,   warlock,  or  wizard)  
This  staff  can  be  wielded  as  a  magic  quarterstaff  that   grants  a  +2  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls  made   with  it.  While  holding  it,  you  gain  a  +2  bonus  to   Armor  Class,  saving  throws,  and  spell  attack  rolls.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

243+}  

   The  staff  has  20  charges  for  the  following   properties.  The  staff  regains  2d8  +  4  expended   charges  daily  at  dawn.  If  you  expend  the  last  charge,   roll  a  d20.  On  a  1,  the  staff  retains  its  +2  bonus  to   attack  and  damage  rolls  but  loses  all  other   properties.  On  a  20,  the  staff  regains  1d8  +  2  charges.      Power  Strike.  When  you  hit  with  a  melee  attack   using  the  staff,  you  can  expend  1  charge  to  deal  an   extra  1d6  force  damage  to  the  target.      Spells.  While  holding  this  staff,  you  can  use  an   action  to  expend  1  or  more  of  its  charges  to  cast  one   of  the  following  spells  from  it,  using  your  spell  save   DC  and  spell  attack  bonus:  cone  of  cold  (5  charges),   fireball  (5th-level  version,  5  charges),  globe  of   invulnerability  (6  charges),  hold  monster  (5  charges),   levitate  (2  charges),  lightning  bolt  (5th-level  version,   5  charges),  magic  missile  (1  charge),  ray  of   enfeeblement  (1  charge),  or  wall  of  force  (5  charges).      Retributive  Strike.  You  can  use  an  action  to  break   the  staff  over  your  knee  or  against  a  solid  surface,   performing  a  retributive  strike.  The  staff  is   destroyed  and  releases  its  remaining  magic  in  an   explosion  that  expands  to  fill  a  30-foot-radius  sphere   centered  on  it.      You  have  a  50  percent  chance  to  instantly  travel  to   a  random  plane  of  existence,  avoiding  the  explosion.   If  you  fail  to  avoid  the  effect,  you  take  force  damage   equal  to  16  ×  the  number  of  charges  in  the  staff.   Every  other  creature  in  the  area  must  make  a  DC  17   Dexterity  saving  throw.  On  a  failed  save,  a  creature   takes  an  amount  of  damage  based  on  how  far  away  it   is  from  the  point  of  origin,  as  shown  in  the  following   table.  On  a  successful  save,  a  creature  takes  half  as   much  damage.  

Distance  from  Origin   10  ft.  away  or  closer   11  to  20  ft.  away   21  to  30  ft.  away  

Damage   8  ×  the  number  of  charges  in  the  staff   6  ×  the  number  of  charges  in  the  staff   4  ×  the  number  of  charges  in  the  staff  

Staff of Striking
Staff,  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  
This  staff  can  be  wielded  as  a  magic  quarterstaff  that   grants  a  +3  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls  made   with  it.      The  staff  has  10  charges.  When  you  hit  with  a   melee  attack  using  it,  you  can  expend  up  to  3  of  its   charges.  For  each  charge  you  expend,  the  target   takes  an  extra  1d6  force  damage.  The  staff  regains   1d6  +  4  expended  charges  daily  at  dawn.  If  you   expend  the  last  charge,  roll  a  d20.  On  a  1,  the  staff   becomes  a  nonmagical  quarterstaff.  

Staff of Swarming Insects
Staff,  rare  (requires  attunement  by  a  bard,  cleric,   druid,  sorcerer,  warlock,  or  wizard)  
This  staff  has  10  charges  and  regains  1d6  +  4   expended  charges  daily  at  dawn.  If  you  expend  the   last  charge,  roll  a  d20.  On  a  1,  a  swarm  of  insects   consumes  and  destroys  the  staff,  then  disperses.      Spells.  While  holding  the  staff,  you  can  use  an   action  to  expend  some  of  its  charges  to  cast  one  of   the  following  spells  from  it,  using  your  spell  save  DC:   giant  insect  (4  charges)  or  insect  plague  (5  charges).      Insect  Cloud.  While  holding  the  staff,  you  can  use   an  action  and  expend  1  charge  to  cause  a  swarm  of   harmless  flying  insects  to  spread  out  in  a  30-foot   radius  from  you.  The  insects  remain  for  10  minutes,   making  the  area  heavily  obscured  for  creatures   other  than  you.  The  swarm  moves  with  you,   remaining  centered  on  you.  A  wind  of  at  least  10   miles  per  hour  disperses  the  swarm  and  ends  the   effect.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

247-]  
Staff of the Magi
Staff,  legendary  (requires  attunement  by  a  sorcerer,   warlock,  or  wizard)  
This  staff  can  be  wielded  as  a  magic  quarterstaff  that   grants  a  +2  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls  made   with  it.  While  you  hold  it,  you  gain  a  +2  bonus  to   spell  attack  rolls.      The  staff  has  50  charges  for  the  following   properties.  It  regains  4d6  +  2  expended  charges   daily  at  dawn.  If  you  expend  the  last  charge,  roll  a   d20.  On  a  20,  the  staff  regains  1d12  +  1  charges.      Spell  Absorption.  While  holding  the  staff,  you   have  advantage  on  saving  throws  against  spells.  In   addition,  you  can  use  your  reaction  when  another   creature  casts  a  spell  that  targets  only  you.  If  you  do,   the  staff  absorbs  the  magic  of  the  spell,  canceling  its   effect  and  gaining  a  number  of  charges  equal  to  the   absorbed  spell's  level.  However,  if  doing  so  brings   the  staff's  total  number  of  charges  above  50,  the  staff   explodes  as  if  you  activated  its  retributive  strike  (see   below).      Spells.  While  holding  the  staff,  you  can  use  an   action  to  expend  some  of  its  charges  to  cast  one  of   the  following  spells  from  it,  using  your  spell  save  DC   and  spellcasting  ability:  conjure  elemental  (7   charges),  dispel  magic  (3  charges),  fireball  (7th-level   version,  7  charges),  flaming  sphere  (2  charges),  ice   storm  (4  charges),  invisibility  (2  charges),  knock  (2   charges),  lightning  bolt  (7th-level  version,  7  charges),   passwall  (5  charges),  plane  shift  (7  charges),  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

244+}  

telekinesis  (5  charges),  wall  of  fire  (4  charges),  or   web  (2  charges).      You  can  also  use  an  action  to  cast  one  of  the   following  spells  from  the  staff  without  using  any   charges:  arcane  lock,  detect  magic,  enlarge/reduce,   light,  mage  hand,  or  protection  from  evil  and  good.      Retributive  Strike.  You  can  use  an  action  to  break   the  staff  over  your  knee  or  against  a  solid  surface,   performing  a  retributive  strike.  The  staff  is   destroyed  and  releases  its  remaining  magic  in  an   explosion  that  expands  to  fill  a  30-foot-radius  sphere   centered  on  it.      You  have  a  50  percent  chance  to  instantly  travel  to   a  random  plane  of  existence,  avoiding  the  explosion.   If  you  fail  to  avoid  the  effect,  you  take  force  damage   equal  to  16  ×  the  number  of  charges  in  the  staff.   Every  other  creature  in  the  area  must  make  a  DC  17   Dexterity  saving  throw.  On  a  failed  save,  a  creature   takes  an  amount  of  damage  based  on  how  far  away  it   is  from  the  point  of  origin,  as  shown  in  the  following   table.  On  a  successful  save,  a  creature  takes  half  as   much  damage.  

Distance  from  Origin   10  ft.  away  or  closer   11  to  20  ft.  away   21  to  30  ft.  away  

Damage   8  ×  the  number  of  charges  in  the  staff   6  ×  the  number  of  charges  in  the  staff   4  ×  the  number  of  charges  in  the  staff  

Staff of the Python
Staff,  uncommon  (requires  attunement  by  a  cleric,   druid,  or  warlock)  
You  can  use  an  action  to  speak  this  staff's  command   word  and  throw  the  staff  on  the  ground  within  10   feet  of  you.  The  staff  becomes  a  giant  constrictor   snake  under  your  control  and  acts  on  its  own   initiative  count.  By  using  a  bonus  action  to  speak  the   command  word  again,  you  return  the  staff  to  its   normal  form  in  a  space  formerly  occupied  by  the   snake.      On  your  turn,  you  can  mentally  command  the   snake  if  it  is  within  60  feet  of  you  and  you  aren't   incapacitated.  You  decide  what  action  the  snake   takes  and  where  it  moves  during  its  next  turn,  or  you   can  issue  it  a  general  command,  such  as  to  attack   your  enemies  or  guard  a  location.      If  the  snake  is  reduced  to  0  hit  points,  it  dies  and   reverts  to  its  staff  form.  The  staff  then  shatters  and  is   destroyed.  If  the  snake  reverts  to  staff  form  before   losing  all  its  hit  points,  it  regains  all  of  them.  

Staff of the Woodlands
Staff,  rare  (requires  attunement  by  a  druid)  
This  staff  can  be  wielded  as  a  magic  quarterstaff  that   grants  a  +2  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls  made   with  it.  While  holding  it,  you  have  a  +2  bonus  to  spell   attack  rolls.      The  staff  has  10  charges  for  the  following   properties.  It  regains  1d6  +  4  expended  charges   daily  at  dawn.  If  you  expend  the  last  charge,  roll  a   d20.  On  a  1,  the  staff  loses  its  properties  and   becomes  a  nonmagical  quarterstaff.      Spells.  You  can  use  an  action  to  expend  1  or  more   of  the  staff's  charges  to  cast  one  of  the  following   spells  from  it,  using  your  spell  save  DC:  animal   friendship  (1  charge),  awaken  (5  charges),  barkskin   (2  charges),  locate  animals  or  plants  (2  charges),   speak  with  animals  (1  charge),  speak  with  plants  (3   charges),  or  wall  of  thorns  (6  charges).      You  can  also  use  an  action  to  cast  the  pass  without   trace  spell  from  the  staff  without  using  any  charges.      Tree  Form.  You  can  use  an  action  to  plant  one  end   of  the  staff  in  fertile  earth  and  expend  1  charge  to   transform  the  staff  into  a  healthy  tree.  The  tree  is  60   feet  tall  and  has  a  5-foot-diameter  trunk,  and  its   branches  at  the  top  spread  out  in  a  20-foot  radius.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

248-]   The  tree  appears  ordinary  but  radiates  a  faint  aura   of  transmutation  magic  if  targeted  by  detect  magic.   While  touching  the  tree  and  using  another  action  to   speak  its  command  word,  you  return  the  staff  to  its   normal  form.  Any  creature  in  the  tree  falls  when  it   reverts  to  a  staff.  
Staff of Thunder and Lightning
Staff,  very  rare  (requires  attunement)  
This  staff  can  be  wielded  as  a  magic  quarterstaff  that   grants  a  +2  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls  made   with  it.  It  also  has  the  following  additional   properties.  When  one  of  these  properties  is  used,  it   can't  be  used  again  until  the  next  dawn.      Lightning.  When  you  hit  with  a  melee  attack  using   the  staff,  you  can  cause  the  target  to  take  an  extra   2d6  lightning  damage.      Thunder.  When  you  hit  with  a  melee  attack  using   the  staff,  you  can  cause  the  staff  to  emit  a  crack  of   thunder,  audible  out  to  300  feet.  The  target  you  hit   must  succeed  on  a  DC  17  Constitution  saving  throw   or  become  stunned  until  the  end  of  your  next  turn.      Lightning  Strike.  You  can  use  an  action  to  cause  a   bolt  of  lightning  to  leap  from  the  staff's  tip  in  a  line   that  is  5  feet  wide  and  120  feet  long.  Each  creature  in   that  line  must  make  a  DC  17  Dexterity  saving  throw,  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

245+}  

taking  9d6  lightning  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half   as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.      Thunderclap.  You  can  use  an  action  to  cause  the   staff  to  issue  a  deafening  thunderclap,  audible  out  to   600  feet.  Each  creature  within  60  feet  of  you  (not   including  you)  must  make  a  DC  17  Constitution   saving  throw.  On  a  failed  save,  a  creature  takes  2d6   thunder  damage  and  becomes  deafened  for  1  minute.   On  a  successful  save,  a  creature  takes  half  damage   and  isn't  deafened.      Thunder  and  Lightning.  You  can  use  an  action  to   use  the  Lightning  Strike  and  Thunderclap  properties   at  the  same  time.  Doing  so  doesn't  expend  the  daily   use  of  those  properties,  only  the  use  of  this  one.  
Staff of Withering
Staff,  rare  (requires  attunement  by  a  cleric,  druid,  or   warlock)  
This  staff  has  3  charges  and  regains  1d3  expended   charges  daily  at  dawn.      The  staff  can  be  wielded  as  a  magic  quarterstaff.   On  a  hit,  it  deals  damage  as  a  normal  quarterstaff,   and  you  can  expend  1  charge  to  deal  an  extra  2d10   necrotic  damage  to  the  target.  In  addition,  the  target   must  succeed  on  a  DC  15  Constitution  saving  throw   or  have  disadvantage  for  1  hour  on  any  ability  check   or  saving  throw  that  uses  Strength  or  Constitution.  
Stone of Controlling Earth Elementals
Wondrous  item,  rare  
If  the  stone  is  touching  the  ground,  you  can  use  an   action  to  speak  its  command  word  and  summon  an   earth  elemental,  as  if  you  had  cast  the  conjure   elemental  spell.  The  stone  can't  be  used  this  way   again  until  the  next  dawn.  The  stone  weighs  5   pounds.  
Stone of Good Luck (Luckstone)
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
While  this  polished  agate  is  on  your  person,  you  gain   a  +1  bonus  to  ability  checks  and  saving  throws.  
Sun Blade
Weapon  (longsword),  rare  (requires  attunement)  
This  item  appears  to  be  a  longsword  hilt.  While   grasping  the  hilt,  you  can  use  a  bonus  action  to  cause   a  blade  of  pure  radiance  to  spring  into  existence,  or   make  the  blade  disappear.  While  the  blade  exists,   this  magic  longsword  has  the  finesse  property.  If  you   are  proficient  with  shortswords  or  longswords,  you   are  proficient  with  the  sun  blade.  

   You  gain  a  +2  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls   made  with  this  weapon,  which  deals  radiant  damage   instead  of  slashing  damage.  When  you  hit  an  undead   with  it,  that  target  takes  an  extra  1d8  radiant   damage.      The  sword's  luminous  blade  emits  bright  light  in  a   15-foot  radius  and  dim  light  for  an  additional  15  feet.   The  light  is  sunlight.  While  the  blade  persists,  you   can  use  an  action  to  expand  or  reduce  its  radius  of   bright  and  dim  light  by  5  feet  each,  to  a  maximum  of   30  feet  each  or  a  minimum  of  10  feet  each.  
Sword of Life Stealing
Weapon  (any  sword),  rare  (requires  attunement)  
When  you  attack  a  creature  with  this  magic  weapon   and  roll  a  20  on  the  attack  roll,  that  target  takes  an   extra  3d6  necrotic  damage,  provided  that  the  target   isn't  a  construct  or  an  undead.  You  gain  temporary   hit  points  equal  to  the  extra  damage  dealt.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

249-]  
Sword of Sharpness
Weapon  (any  sword  that  deals  slashing  damage),  very   rare  (requires  attunement)  
When  you  attack  an  object  with  this  magic  sword   and  hit,  maximize  your  weapon  damage  dice  against   the  target.      When  you  attack  a  creature  with  this  weapon  and   roll  a  20  on  the  attack  roll,  that  target  takes  an  extra   4d6  slashing  damage.  Then  roll  another  d20.  If  you   roll  a  20,  you  lop  off  one  of  the  target's  limbs,  with   the  effect  of  such  loss  determined  by  the  GM.  If  the   creature  has  no  limb  to  sever,  you  lop  off  a  portion  of   its  body  instead.      In  addition,  you  can  speak  the  sword's  command   word  to  cause  the  blade  to  shed  bright  light  in  a  10- foot  radius  and  dim  light  for  an  additional  10  feet.   Speaking  the  command  word  again  or  sheathing  the   sword  puts  out  the  light.  
Sword of Wounding
Weapon  (any  sword),  rare  (requires  attunement)  
Hit  points  lost  to  this  weapon's  damage  can  be   regained  only  through  a  short  or  long  rest,  rather   than  by  regeneration,  magic,  or  any  other  means.      Once  per  turn,  when  you  hit  a  creature  with  an   attack  using  this  magic  weapon,  you  can  wound  the   target.  At  the  start  of  each  of  the  wounded  creature's   turns,  it  takes  1d4  necrotic  damage  for  each  time   you've  wounded  it,  and  it  can  then  make  a  DC  15   Constitution  saving  throw,  ending  the  effect  of  all   such  wounds  on  itself  on  a  success.  Alternatively,  the   wounded  creature,  or  a  creature  within  5  feet  of  it,  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

246+}  

can  use  an  action  to  make  a  DC  15  Wisdom   (Medicine)  check,  ending  the  effect  of  such  wounds   on  it  on  a  success.  
Talisman of Pure Good
Wondrous  item,  legendary  (requires  attunement  by  a   creature  of  good  alignment)  
This  talisman  is  a  mighty  symbol  of  goodness.  A   creature  that  is  neither  good  nor  evil  in  alignment   takes  6d6  radiant  damage  upon  touching  the   talisman.  An  evil  creature  takes  8d6  radiant  damage   upon  touching  the  talisman.  Either  sort  of  creature   takes  the  damage  again  each  time  it  ends  its  turn   holding  or  carrying  the  talisman.      If  you  are  a  good  cleric  or  paladin,  you  can  use  the   talisman  as  a  holy  symbol,  and  you  gain  a  +2  bonus   to  spell  attack  rolls  while  you  wear  or  hold  it.      The  talisman  has  7  charges.  If  you  are  wearing  or   holding  it,  you  can  use  an  action  to  expend  1  charge   from  it  and  choose  one  creature  you  can  see  on  the   ground  within  120  feet  of  you.  If  the  target  is  of  evil   alignment,  a  flaming  fissure  opens  under  it.  The   target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  20  Dexterity  saving   throw  or  fall  into  the  fissure  and  be  destroyed,   leaving  no  remains.  The  fissure  then  closes,  leaving   no  trace  of  its  existence.  When  you  expend  the  last   charge,  the  talisman  disperses  into  motes  of  golden   light  and  is  destroyed.  
Talisman of the Sphere
Wondrous  item,  legendary  (requires  attunement)  
When  you  make  an  Intelligence  (Arcana)  check  to   control  a  sphere  of  annihilation  while  you  are   holding  this  talisman,  you  double  your  proficiency   bonus  on  the  check.  In  addition,  when  you  start  your   turn  with  control  over  a  sphere  of  annihilation,  you   can  use  an  action  to  levitate  it  10  feet  plus  a  number   of  additional  feet  equal  to  10  ×  your  Intelligence   modifier.  
Talisman of Ultimate Evil
Wondrous  item,  legendary  (requires  attunement  by  a   creature  of  evil  alignment)  
This  item  symbolizes  unrepentant  evil.  A  creature   that  is  neither  good  nor  evil  in  alignment  takes  6d6   necrotic  damage  upon  touching  the  talisman.  A  good   creature  takes  8d6  necrotic  damage  upon  touching   the  talisman.  Either  sort  of  creature  takes  the   damage  again  each  time  it  ends  its  turn  holding  or   carrying  the  talisman.  

   If  you  are  an  evil  cleric  or  paladin,  you  can  use  the   talisman  as  a  holy  symbol,  and  you  gain  a  +2  bonus   to  spell  attack  rolls  while  you  wear  or  hold  it.      The  talisman  has  6  charges.  If  you  are  wearing  or   holding  it,  you  can  use  an  action  to  expend  1  charge   from  the  talisman  and  choose  one  creature  you  can   see  on  the  ground  within  120  feet  of  you.  If  the   target  is  of  good  alignment,  a  flaming  fissure  opens   under  it.  The  target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  20   Dexterity  saving  throw  or  fall  into  the  fissure  and  be   destroyed,  leaving  no  remains.  The  fissure  then   closes,  leaving  no  trace  of  its  existence.  When  you   expend  the  last  charge,  the  talisman  dissolves  into   foul-smelling  slime  and  is  destroyed.  
Tome of Clear Thought
Wondrous  item,  very  rare  
This  book  contains  memory  and  logic  exercises,  and   its  words  are  charged  with  magic.  If  you  spend  48   hours  over  a  period  of  6  days  or  fewer  studying  the   book's  contents  and  practicing  its  guidelines,  your   Intelligence  score  increases  by  2,  as  does  your  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

250-]   maximum  for  that  score.  The  manual  then  loses  its   magic,  but  regains  it  in  a  century.  
Tome of Leadership and Influence
Wondrous  item,  very  rare  
This  book  contains  guidelines  for  influencing  and   charming  others,  and  its  words  are  charged  with   magic.  If  you  spend  48  hours  over  a  period  of  6  days   or  fewer  studying  the  book's  contents  and  practicing   its  guidelines,  your  Charisma  score  increases  by  2,  as   does  your  maximum  for  that  score.  The  manual  then   loses  its  magic,  but  regains  it  in  a  century.  
Tome of Understanding
Wondrous  item,  very  rare  
This  book  contains  intuition  and  insight  exercises,   and  its  words  are  charged  with  magic.  If  you  spend   48  hours  over  a  period  of  6  days  or  fewer  studying   the  book's  contents  and  practicing  its  guidelines,   your  Wisdom  score  increases  by  2,  as  does  your   maximum  for  that  score.  The  manual  then  loses  its   magic,  but  regains  it  in  a  century.  
Trident of Fish Command
Weapon  (trident),  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
This  trident  is  a  magic  weapon.  It  has  3  charges.   While  you  carry  it,  you  can  use  an  action  and  expend   1  charge  to  cast  dominate  beast  (save  DC  15)  from  it  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

247+}  

on  a  beast  that  has  an  innate  swimming  speed.  The   trident  regains  1d3  expended  charges  daily  at  dawn.  
Universal Solvent
Wondrous  item,  legendary  
This  tube  holds  milky  liquid  with  a  strong  alcohol   smell.  You  can  use  an  action  to  pour  the  contents  of   the  tube  onto  a  surface  within  reach.  The  liquid   instantly  dissolves  up  to  1  square  foot  of  adhesive  it   touches,  including  sovereign  glue.  
Vicious Weapon
Weapon  (any),  rare  
When  you  roll  a  20  on  your  attack  roll  with  this   magic  weapon,  your  critical  hit  deals  an  extra  2d6   damage  of  the  weapon's  type.  
Vorpal Sword
Weapon  (any  sword  that  deals  slashing  damage),   legendary  (requires  attunement)  
You  gain  a  +3  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls   made  with  this  magic  weapon.  In  addition,  the   weapon  ignores  resistance  to  slashing  damage.      When  you  attack  a  creature  that  has  at  least  one   head  with  this  weapon  and  roll  a  20  on  the  attack   roll,  you  cut  off  one  of  the  creature's  heads.  The   creature  dies  if  it  can't  survive  without  the  lost  head.   A  creature  is  immune  to  this  effect  if  it  is  immune  to   slashing  damage,  doesn't  have  or  need  a  head,  has   legendary  actions,  or  the  GM  decides  that  the   creature  is  too  big  for  its  head  to  be  cut  off  with  this   weapon.  Such  a  creature  instead  takes  an  extra  6d8   slashing  damage  from  the  hit.  
Wand of Binding
Wand,  rare  (requires  attunement  by  a  spellcaster)  
This  wand  has  7  charges  for  the  following  properties.   It  regains  1d6  +  1  expended  charges  daily  at  dawn.  If   you  expend  the  wand's  last  charge,  roll  a  d20.  On  a  1,   the  wand  crumbles  into  ashes  and  is  destroyed.      Spells.  While  holding  the  wand,  you  can  use  an   action  to  expend  some  of  its  charges  to  cast  one  of   the  following  spells  (save  DC  17):  hold  monster  (5   charges)  or  hold  person  (2  charges).      Assisted  Escape.  While  holding  the  wand,  you  can   use  your  reaction  to  expend  1  charge  and  gain   advantage  on  a  saving  throw  you  make  to  avoid   being  paralyzed  or  restrained,  or  you  can  expend  1   charge  and  gain  advantage  on  any  check  you  make  to   escape  a  grapple.  

Wand of Enemy Detection
Wand,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
This  wand  has  7  charges.  While  holding  it,  you  can   use  an  action  and  expend  1  charge  to  speak  its   command  word.  For  the  next  minute,  you  know  the   direction  of  the  nearest  creature  hostile  to  you   within  60  feet,  but  not  its  distance  from  you.  The   wand  can  sense  the  presence  of  hostile  creatures   that  are  ethereal,  invisible,  disguised,  or  hidden,  as   well  as  those  in  plain  sight.  The  effect  ends  if  you   stop  holding  the  wand.      The  wand  regains  1d6  +  1  expended  charges  daily   at  dawn.  If  you  expend  the  wand's  last  charge,  roll  a   d20.  On  a  1,  the  wand  crumbles  into  ashes  and  is   destroyed.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

251-]  
Wand of Fear
Wand,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
This  wand  has  7  charges  for  the  following  properties.   It  regains  1d6  +  1  expended  charges  daily  at  dawn.  If   you  expend  the  wand's  last  charge,  roll  a  d20.  On  a  1,   the  wand  crumbles  into  ashes  and  is  destroyed.      Command.  While  holding  the  wand,  you  can  use   an  action  to  expend  1  charge  and  command  another   creature  to  flee  or  grovel,  as  with  the  command  spell   (save  DC  15).      Cone  of  Fear.  While  holding  the  wand,  you  can  use   an  action  to  expend  2  charges,  causing  the  wand's  tip   to  emit  a  60-foot  cone  of  amber  light.  Each  creature   in  the  cone  must  succeed  on  a  DC  15  Wisdom  saving   throw  or  become  frightened  of  you  for  1  minute.   While  it  is  frightened  in  this  way,  a  creature  must   spend  its  turns  trying  to  move  as  far  away  from  you   as  it  can,  and  it  can't  willingly  move  to  a  space  within   30  feet  of  you.  It  also  can't  take  reactions.  For  its   action,  it  can  use  only  the  Dash  action  or  try  to   escape  from  an  effect  that  prevents  it  from  moving.  If   it  has  nowhere  it  can  move,  the  creature  can  use  the   Dodge  action.  At  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  a   creature  can  repeat  the  saving  throw,  ending  the   effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  
Wand of Fireballs
Wand,  rare  (requires  attunement  by  a  spellcaster)  
This  wand  has  7  charges.  While  holding  it,  you  can   use  an  action  to  expend  1  or  more  of  its  charges  to   cast  the  fireball  spell  (save  DC  15)  from  it.  For  1   charge,  you  cast  the  3rd-level  version  of  the  spell.   You  can  increase  the  spell  slot  level  by  one  for  each   additional  charge  you  expend.      The  wand  regains  1d6  +  1  expended  charges  daily   at  dawn.  If  you  expend  the  wand's  last  charge,  roll  a  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

248+}  

d20.  On  a  1,  the  wand  crumbles  into  ashes  and  is   destroyed.  
Wand of Lightning Bolts
Wand,  rare  (requires  attunement  by  a  spellcaster)  
This  wand  has  7  charges.  While  holding  it,  you  can   use  an  action  to  expend  1  or  more  of  its  charges  to   cast  the  lightning  bolt  spell  (save  DC  15)  from  it.  For   1  charge,  you  cast  the  3rd-level  version  of  the  spell.   You  can  increase  the  spell  slot  level  by  one  for  each   additional  charge  you  expend.      The  wand  regains  1d6  +  1  expended  charges  daily   at  dawn.  If  you  expend  the  wand's  last  charge,  roll  a   d20.  On  a  1,  the  wand  crumbles  into  ashes  and  is   destroyed.  
Wand of Magic Detection
Wand,  uncommon  
This  wand  has  3  charges.  While  holding  it,  you  can   expend  1  charge  as  an  action  to  cast  the  detect  magic   spell  from  it.  The  wand  regains  1d3  expended   charges  daily  at  dawn.  
Wand of Magic Missiles
Wand,  uncommon  
This  wand  has  7  charges.  While  holding  it,  you  can   use  an  action  to  expend  1  or  more  of  its  charges  to   cast  the  magic  missile  spell  from  it.  For  1  charge,  you   cast  the  1st-level  version  of  the  spell.  You  can   increase  the  spell  slot  level  by  one  for  each   additional  charge  you  expend.      The  wand  regains  1d6  +  1  expended  charges  daily   at  dawn.  If  you  expend  the  wand's  last  charge,  roll  a   d20.  On  a  1,  the  wand  crumbles  into  ashes  and  is   destroyed.  
Wand of Paralysis
Wand,  rare  (requires  attunement  by  a  spellcaster)  
This  wand  has  7  charges.  While  holding  it,  you  can   use  an  action  to  expend  1  of  its  charges  to  cause  a   thin  blue  ray  to  streak  from  the  tip  toward  a  creature   you  can  see  within  60  feet  of  you.  The  target  must   succeed  on  a  DC  15  Constitution  saving  throw  or  be   paralyzed  for  1  minute.  At  the  end  of  each  of  the   target's  turns,  it  can  repeat  the  saving  throw,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.      The  wand  regains  1d6  +  1  expended  charges  daily   at  dawn.  If  you  expend  the  wand's  last  charge,  roll  a   d20.  On  a  1,  the  wand  crumbles  into  ashes  and  is   destroyed.  

Wand of Polymorph
Wand,  very  rare  (requires  attunement  by  a   spellcaster)  
This  wand  has  7  charges.  While  holding  it,  you  can   use  an  action  to  expend  1  of  its  charges  to  cast  the   polymorph  spell  (save  DC  15)  from  it.      The  wand  regains  1d6  +  1  expended  charges  daily   at  dawn.  If  you  expend  the  wand's  last  charge,  roll  a   d20.  On  a  1,  the  wand  crumbles  into  ashes  and  is   destroyed.  
Wand of Secrets
Wand,  uncommon  
The  wand  has  3  charges.  While  holding  it,  you  can   use  an  action  to  expend  1  of  its  charges,  and  if  a   secret  door  or  trap  is  within  30  feet  of  you,  the  wand  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

252-]   pulses  and  points  at  the  one  nearest  to  you.  The   wand  regains  1d3  expended  charges  daily  at  dawn.  
Wand of the War Mage, +1, +2, or +3
Wand,  uncommon  (+1),  rare  (+2),  or  very  rare  (+3)   (requires  attunement  by  a  spellcaster)  
While  holding  this  wand,  you  gain  a  bonus  to  spell   attack  rolls  determined  by  the  wand's  rarity.  In   addition,  you  ignore  half  cover  when  making  a  spell   attack.  
Wand of Web
Wand,  uncommon  (requires  attunement  by  a   spellcaster)  
This  wand  has  7  charges.  While  holding  it,  you  can   use  an  action  to  expend  1  of  its  charges  to  cast  the   web  spell  (save  DC  15)  from  it.      The  wand  regains  1d6  +  1  expended  charges  daily   at  dawn.  If  you  expend  the  wand's  last  charge,  roll  a   d20.  On  a  1,  the  wand  crumbles  into  ashes  and  is   destroyed.  
Wand of Wonder
Wand,  rare  (requires  attunement  by  a  spellcaster)  
This  wand  has  7  charges.  While  holding  it,  you  can   use  an  action  to  expend  1  of  its  charges  and  choose  a   target  within  120  feet  of  you.  The  target  can  be  a   creature,  an  object,  or  a  point  in  space.  Roll  d100  and   consult  the  following  table  to  discover  what  happens.      If  the  effect  causes  you  to  cast  a  spell  from  the   wand,  the  spell's  save  DC  is  15.  If  the  spell  normally   has  a  range  expressed  in  feet,  its  range  becomes  120   feet  if  it  isn't  already.      If  an  effect  covers  an  area,  you  must  center  the   spell  on  and  include  the  target.  If  an  effect  has  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

249+}  

multiple  possible  subjects,  the  GM  randomly   determines  which  ones  are  affected.      The  wand  regains  1d6  +  1  expended  charges  daily   at  dawn.  If  you  expend  the  wand's  last  charge,  roll  a   d20.  On  a  1,  the  wand  crumbles  into  dust  and  is   destroyed.  

d100   01­05   06­10   11­15   16­20   21­25  
26­30   31­33  
{+34­36  
37­46   47­49  
50­53  
54­58   59­62  
63­65  
66­69   70­79   80­84   85­87  
88­90+}  

Effect   You  cast  slow.   You  cast  faerie  fire.   You  are  stunned  until  the  start  of  your  next  turn,   believing  something  awesome  just  happened.   You  cast  gust  of  wind.   You  cast  detect  thoughts  on  the  target  you   chose.  If  you  didn't  target  a  creature,  you   instead  take  1d6  psychic  damage.   You  cast  stinking  cloud.   Heavy  rain  falls  in  a  60-foot  radius  centered  on  

[-34­36  
37­46   47­49   50­53   54­58   59­62   63­65   66­69   70­79   80­84   85­87  
88­90  
91­95  
96­97   98­00-]   the  target.  The  area  becomes  lightly  obscured.   The  rain  falls  until  the  start  of  your  next  turn.   An  animal  appears  in  the  unoccupied  space   nearest  the  target.  The  animal  isn't  under  your   control  and  acts  as  it  normally  would.  Roll  a  d100   to  determine  which  animal  appears.  On  a  01­25,   a  rhinoceros  appears;  on  a  26­50,  an  elephant   appears;  and  on  a  51­100,  a  rat  appears.   You  cast  lightning  bolt.   A  cloud  of  600  oversized  butterflies  fills  a  30-foot   radius  centered  on  the  target.  The  area  becomes   heavily  obscured.  The  butterflies  remain  for  10   minutes.   You  enlarge  the  target  as  if  you  had  cast   enlarge/reduce.  If  the  target  can't  be  affected  by   that  spell,  or  if  you  didn't  target  a  creature,  you   become  the  target.   You  cast  darkness.   Grass  grows  on  the  ground  in  a  60-foot  radius   centered  on  the  target.  If  grass  is  already  there,   it  grows  to  ten  times  its  normal  size  and  remains   overgrown  for  1  minute.   An  object  of  the  GM's  choice  disappears  into  the   Ethereal  Plane.  The  object  must  be  neither  worn   nor  carried,  within  120  feet  of  the  target,  and  no   larger  than  10  feet  in  any  dimension.   You  shrink  yourself  as  if  you  had  cast   enlarge/reduce  on  yourself.   You  cast  fireball.   You  cast  invisibility  on  yourself.   Leaves  grow  from  the  target.  If  you  chose  a  point   in  space  as  the  target,  leaves  sprout  from  the   creature  nearest  to  that  point.  Unless  they  are   picked  off,  the  leaves  turn  brown  and  fall  off   after  24  hours.   A  stream  of  1d4  ×  10  gems,  each  worth  1  gp,   shoots  from  the  wand's  tip  in  a  line  30  feet  long   and  5  feet  wide.  Each  gem  deals  1  bludgeoning   damage,  and  the  total  damage  of  the  gems  is  

{+91­95  
96­97   98­00+}  

divided  equally  among  all  creatures  in  the  line.   A  burst  of  colorful  shimmering  light  extends   from  you  in  a  30-foot  radius.  You  and  each   creature  in  the  area  that  can  see  must  succeed   on  a  DC  15  Constitution  saving  throw  or  become   blinded  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat  the   saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,   ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.   The  target's  skin  turns  bright  blue  for  1d10  days.   If  you  chose  a  point  in  space,  the  creature   nearest  to  that  point  is  affected.   If  you  targeted  a  creature,  it  must  make  a  DC  15   Constitution  saving  throw.  If  you  didn't  target  a   creature,  you  become  the  target  and  must  make   the  saving  throw.  If  the  saving  throw  fails  by  5  or   more,  the  target  is  instantly  petrified.  On  any   other  failed  save,  the  target  is  restrained  and   begins  to  turn  to  stone.  While  restrained  in  this  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

253-]   way,  the  target  must  repeat  the  saving  throw  at   the  end  of  its  next  turn,  becoming  petrified  on  a   failure  or  ending  the  effect  on  a  success.  The   petrification  lasts  until  the  target  is  freed  by  the   greater  restoration  spell  or  similar  magic.  

Weapon, +1, +2, or +3
Weapon  (any),  uncommon  (+1),  rare  (+2),  or  very   rare  (+3)  
You  have  a  bonus  to  attack  and  damage  rolls  made   with  this  magic  weapon.  The  bonus  is  determined  by   the  weapon's  rarity.  

Well of Many Worlds
Wondrous  item,  legendary  
This  fine  black  cloth,  soft  as  silk,  is  folded  up  to  the   dimensions  of  a  handkerchief.  It  unfolds  into  a   circular  sheet  6  feet  in  diameter.      You  can  use  an  action  to  unfold  and  place  the  well   of  many  worlds  on  a  solid  surface,  whereupon  it   creates  a  two-way  portal  to  another  world  or  plane   of  existence.  Each  time  the  item  opens  a  portal,  the   GM  decides  where  it  leads.  You  can  use  an  action  to   close  an  open  portal  by  taking  hold  of  the  edges  of   the  cloth  and  folding  it  up.  Once  well  of  many  worlds   has  opened  a  portal,  it  can't  do  so  again  for  1d8   hours.  

Wind Fan
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  
While  holding  this  fan,  you  can  use  an  action  to  cast   the  gust  of  wind  spell  (save  DC  13)  from  it.  Once  used,   the  fan  shouldn't  be  used  again  until  the  next  dawn.   Each  time  it  is  used  again  before  then,  it  has  a  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

250+}  

cumulative  20  percent  chance  of  not  working  and   tearing  into  useless,  nonmagical  tatters.  
Winged Boots
Wondrous  item,  uncommon  (requires  attunement)  
While  you  wear  these  boots,  you  have  a  flying  speed   equal  to  your  walking  speed.  You  can  use  the  boots   to  fly  for  up  to  4  hours,  all  at  once  or  in  several   shorter  flights,  each  one  using  a  minimum  of  1   minute  from  the  duration.  If  you  are  flying  when  the   duration  expires,  you  descend  at  a  rate  of  30  feet  per   round  until  you  land.      The  boots  regain  2  hours  of  flying  capability  for   every  12  hours  they  aren't  in  use.  
Wings of Flying
Wondrous  item,  rare  (requires  attunement)  
While  wearing  this  cloak,  you  can  use  an  action  to   speak  its  command  word.  This  turns  the  cloak  into  a   pair  of  bat  wings  or  bird  wings  on  your  back  for  1   hour  or  until  you  repeat  the  command  word  as  an   action.  The  wings  give  you  a  flying  speed  of  60  feet.   When  they  disappear,  you  can't  use  them  again  for   1d12  hours.  
Sentient Magic Items
Some  magic  items  possess  sentience  and  personality.   Such  an  item  might  be  possessed,  haunted  by  the   spirit  of  a  previous  owner,  or  self-aware  thanks  to   the  magic  used  to  create  it.  In  any  case,  the  item   behaves  like  a  character,  complete  with  personality   quirks,  ideals,  bonds,  and  sometimes  flaws.  A   sentient  item  might  be  a  cherished  ally  to  its  wielder   or  a  continual  thorn  in  the  side.      Most  sentient  items  are  weapons.  Other  kinds  of   items  can  manifest  sentience,  but  consumable  items   such  as  potions  and  scrolls  are  never  sentient.      Sentient  magic  items  function  as  NPCs  under  the   GM's  control.  Any  activated  property  of  the  item  is   under  the  item's  control,  not  its  wielder's.  As  long  as   the  wielder  maintains  a  good  relationship  with  the   item,  the  wielder  can  access  those  properties   normally.  If  the  relationship  is  strained,  the  item  can   suppress  its  activated  properties  or  even  turn  them   against  the  wielder.  
Creating Sentient Magic Items
When  you  decide  to  make  a  magic  item  sentient,  you   create  the  item's  persona  in  the  same  way  you  would   create  an  NPC,  with  a  few  exceptions  described  here.  

Abilities
A  sentient  magic  item  has  Intelligence,  Wisdom,  and   Charisma  scores.  You  can  choose  the  item's  abilities   or  determine  them  randomly.  To  determine  them   randomly,  roll  4d6  for  each  one,  dropping  the  lowest   roll  and  totaling  the  rest.  

Communication
A  sentient  item  has  some  ability  to  communicate,   either  by  sharing  its  emotions,  broadcasting  its   thoughts  telepathically,  or  speaking  aloud.  You  can   choose  how  it  communicates  or  roll  on  the  following   table.  

d100   [-Communication-]   01­60  
{+61­90  
91­00  

Communication+}   The  item  communicates  by  transmitting  emotion  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

254  

61­90   91­00-]   to  the  creature  carrying  or  wielding  it.   The  item  can  speak,  read,  and  understand  one   or  more  languages.   The  item  can  speak,  read,  and  understand  one   or  more  languages.  In  addition,  the  item  can   communicate  telepathically  with  any  character   that  carries  or  wields  it.  

Senses
With  sentience  comes  awareness.  A  sentient  item   can  perceive  its  surroundings  out  to  a  limited  range.   You  can  choose  its  senses  or  roll  on  the  following   table.  
d4   Senses   1   Hearing  and  normal  vision  out  to  30  feet.   2   Hearing  and  normal  vision  out  to  60  feet   3   Hearing  and  normal  vision  out  to  120  feet.   4   Hearing  and  darkvision  out  to  120  feet.  

Alignment
A  sentient  magic  item  has  an  alignment.  Its  creator   or  nature  might  suggest  an  alignment.  If  not,  you  can   pick  an  alignment  or  roll  on  the  following  table.  

d100   Alignment  

   d100   Alignment  

01­15   Lawful  good      74­85   Chaotic  neutral  

16­35   Neutral  good      86­89   Lawful  evil  

36­50   Chaotic  good      90­96   Neutral  evil  

51­63   Lawful  neutral      97­00   Chaotic  evil  

64­73   Neutral  

        

Special Purpose
You  can  give  a  sentient  item  an  objective  it  pursues,   perhaps  to  the  exclusion  of  all  else.  As  long  as  the   wielder's  use  of  the  item  aligns  with  that  special   purpose,  the  item  remains  cooperative.  Deviating   from  this  course  might  cause  conflict  between  the   wielder  and  the  item,  and  could  even  cause  the  item   to  prevent  the  use  of  its  activated  properties.  You  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

251+}  

can  pick  a  special  purpose  or  roll  on  the  following   table.  
d10   Purpose   1   Aligned:  The  item  seeks  to  defeat  or  destroy  those  of  a   diametrically  opposed  alignment.  (Such  an  item  is   never  neutral.)   2   Bane:  The  item  seeks  to  defeat  or  destroy  creatures  of   a  particular  kind,  such  as  fiends,  shapechangers,  trolls,   or  wizards.   3   Protector:  The  item  seeks  to  defend  a  particular  race   or  kind  of  creature,  such  as  elves  or  druids.   4   Crusader:  The  item  seeks  to  defeat,  weaken,  or   destroy  the  servants  of  a  particular  deity.   5   Templar:  The  item  seeks  to  defend  the  servants  and   interests  of  a  particular  deity.   6   Destroyer:  The  item  craves  destruction  and  goads  its   user  to  fight  arbitrarily.   7   Glory  Seeker:  The  item  seeks  renown  as  the  greatest   magic  item  in  the  world,  by  establishing  its  user  as  a   famous  or  notorious  figure.   8   Lore  Seeker:  The  item  craves  knowledge  or  is   determined  to  solve  a  mystery,  learn  a  secret,  or   unravel  a  cryptic  prophecy.   9   Destiny  Seeker:  The  item  is  convinced  that  it  and  its   wielder  have  key  roles  to  play  in  future  events.   10   Creator  Seeker:  The  item  seeks  its  creator  and  wants   to  understand  why  it  was  created.  
  
Conflict
A  sentient  item  has  a  will  of  its  own,  shaped  by  its   personality  and  alignment.  If  its  wielder  acts  in  a   manner  opposed  to  the  item's  alignment  or  purpose,   conflict  can  arise.  When  such  a  conflict  occurs,  the   item  makes  a  Charisma  check  contested  by  the   wielder's  Charisma  check.  If  the  item  wins  the   contest,  it  makes  one  or  more  of  the  following   demands:  
·   The  item  insists  on  being  carried  or  worn  at  all   times.  
·   The  item  demands  that  its  wielder  dispose  of   anything  the  item  finds  repugnant.  
·   The  item  demands  that  its  wielder  pursue  the   item's  goals  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  goals.  
·   The  item  demands  to  be  given  to  someone  else.  
   If  its  wielder  refuses  to  comply  with  the  item's   wishes,  the  item  can  do  any  or  all  of  the  following:  
·   Make  it  impossible  for  its  wielder  to  attune  to  it.   ·   Suppress  one  or  more  of  its  activated  properties.   ·   Attempt  to  take  control  of  its  wielder.  
   If  a  sentient  item  attempts  to  take  control  of  its   wielder,  the  wielder  must  make  a  Charisma  saving  

throw,  with  a  DC  equal  to  12  +  the  item's  Charisma   modifier.  On  a  failed  save,  the  wielder  is  charmed  by   the  item  for  1d12  hours.  While  charmed,  the  wielder   must  try  to  follow  the  item's  commands.  If  the   wielder  takes  damage,  it  can  repeat  the  saving  throw,   ending  the  effect  on  a  success.  Whether  the  attempt   to  control  its  user  succeeds  or  fails,  the  item  can't   use  this  power  again  until  the  next  dawn.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

255-]  
Artifacts
Orb of Dragonkind
Wondrous  item,  artifact  (requires  attunement)  
Ages  past,  elves  and  humans  waged  a  terrible  war   against  evil  dragons.  When  the  world  seemed   doomed,  powerful  wizards  came  together  and   worked  their  greatest  magic,  forging  five  Orbs  of   Dragonkind  (or  Dragon  Orbs)  to  help  them  defeat  the   dragons.  One  orb  was  taken  to  each  of  the  five   wizard  towers,  and  there  they  were  used  to  speed   the  war  toward  a  victorious  end.  The  wizards  used   the  orbs  to  lure  dragons  to  them,  then  destroyed  the   dragons  with  powerful  magic.      As  the  wizard  towers  fell  in  later  ages,  the  orbs   were  destroyed  or  faded  into  legend,  and  only  three   are  thought  to  survive.  Their  magic  has  been  warped   and  twisted  over  the  centuries,  so  although  their   primary  purpose  of  calling  dragons  still  functions,   they  also  allow  some  measure  of  control  over   dragons.      Each  orb  contains  the  essence  of  an  evil  dragon,  a   presence  that  resents  any  attempt  to  coax  magic   from  it.  Those  lacking  in  force  of  personality  might   find  themselves  enslaved  to  an  orb.      An  orb  is  an  etched  crystal  globe  about  10  inches   in  diameter.  When  used,  it  grows  to  about  20  inches   in  diameter,  and  mist  swirls  inside  it.      While  attuned  to  an  orb,  you  can  use  an  action  to   peer  into  the  orb's  depths  and  speak  its  command   word.  You  must  then  make  a  DC  15  Charisma  check.   On  a  successful  check,  you  control  the  orb  for  as  long   as  you  remain  attuned  to  it.  On  a  failed  check,  you   become  charmed  by  the  orb  for  as  long  as  you   remain  attuned  to  it.      While  you  are  charmed  by  the  orb,  you  can't   voluntarily  end  your  attunement  to  it,  and  the  orb   casts  suggestion  on  you  at  will  (save  DC  18),  urging   you  to  work  toward  the  evil  ends  it  desires.  The   dragon  essence  within  the  orb  might  want  many   things:  the  annihilation  of  a  particular  people,   freedom  from  the  orb,  to  spread  suffering  in  the  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

252+}  

world,  to  advance  the  worship  of  Tiamat,  or   something  else  the  GM  decides.      Random  Properties.  An  Orb  of  Dragonkind  has  the   following  random  properties:  
·   2  minor  beneficial  properties   ·   1  minor  detrimental  property   ·   1  major  detrimental  property  
   Spells.  The  orb  has  7  charges  and  regains  1d4  +  3   expended  charges  daily  at  dawn.  If  you  control  the   orb,  you  can  use  an  action  and  expend  1  or  more   charges  to  cast  one  of  the  following  spells  (save  DC   18)  from  it:  cure  wounds  (5th-level  version,  3   charges),  daylight  (1  charge),  death  ward  (2  charges),   or  scrying  (3  charges).      You  can  also  use  an  action  to  cast  the  detect  magic   spell  from  the  orb  without  using  any  charges.      Call  Dragons.  While  you  control  the  orb,  you  can   use  an  action  to  cause  the  artifact  to  issue  a   telepathic  call  that  extends  in  all  directions  for  40   miles.  Evil  dragons  in  range  feel  compelled  to  come   to  the  orb  as  soon  as  possible  by  the  most  direct   route.  Dragon  deities  such  as  Tiamat  are  unaffected   by  this  call.  Dragons  drawn  to  the  orb  might  be   hostile  toward  you  for  compelling  them  against  their   will.  Once  you  have  used  this  property,  it  can't  be   used  again  for  1  hour.      Destroying  an  Orb.  An  Orb  of  Dragonkind  appears   fragile  but  is  impervious  to  most  damage,  including   the  attacks  and  breath  weapons  of  dragons.  A   disintegrate  spell  or  one  good  hit  from  a  +3  magic   weapon  is  sufficient  to  destroy  an  orb,  however.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

256-]  {+5.1  

253+}  

Monsters

A  monster's  statistics,  sometimes  referred  to  as  its   stat  block,  provide  the  essential  information  that   you  need  to  run  the  monster.  
Size

A  monster  can  be  Tiny,  Small,  Medium,  Large,  Huge,   or  Gargantuan.  The  Size  Categories  table  shows  how   much  space  a  creature  of  a  particular  size  controls  in   combat.  See  the  Player's  Handbook  for  more   information  on  creature  size  and  space.  

Size  Categories  

Size   Tiny  
Small   Medium   Large   Huge   Gargantuan     

Space   2½  by  2½  ft.  
5  by  5  ft.   5  by  5  ft.   10  by  10  ft.   15  by  15  ft.   20  by  20  ft.  or  larger  

Examples   Imp,  sprite  
Giant  rat,  goblin   Orc,  werewolf   Hippogriff,  ogre   Fire  giant,  treant   Kraken,  purple  worm  

Modifying Creatures
Despite  the  versatile  collection  of  monsters  in  this  book,  you   might  be  at  a  loss  when  it  comes  to  finding  the  perfect   creature  for  part  of  an  adventure.  Feel  free  to  tweak  an   existing  creature  to  make  it  into  something  more  useful  for   you,  perhaps  by  borrowing  a  trait  or  two  from  a  different   monster  or  by  using  a  variant  or  template,  such  as  the  ones   in  this  book.  Keep  in  mind  that  modifying  a  monster,   including  when  you  apply  a  template  to  it,  might  change  its   challenge  rating.  
  
Type

A  monster's  type  speaks  to  its  fundamental  nature.   Certain  spells,  magic  items,  class  features,  and  other   effects  in  the  game  interact  in  special  ways  with   creatures  of  a  particular  type.  For  example,  an  arrow   of  dragon  slaying  deals  extra  damage  not  only  to   dragons  but  also  other  creatures  of  the  dragon  type,   such  as  dragon  turtles  and  wyverns.      The  game  includes  the  following  monster  types,   which  have  no  rules  of  their  own.      Aberrations  are  utterly  alien  beings.  Many  of   them  have  innate  magical  abilities  drawn  from  the   creature's  alien  mind  rather  than  the  mystical  forces   of  the  world.  The  quintessential  aberrations  are   aboleths,  beholders,  mind  flayers,  and  slaadi.      Beasts  are  nonhumanoid  creatures  that  are  a   natural  part  of  the  fantasy  ecology.  Some  of  them  

have  magical  powers,  but  most  are  unintelligent  and   lack  any  society  or  language.  Beasts  include  all   varieties  of  ordinary  animals,  dinosaurs,  and  giant   versions  of  animals.      Celestials  are  creatures  native  to  the  Upper   Planes.  Many  of  them  are  the  servants  of  deities,   employed  as  messengers  or  agents  in  the  mortal   realm  and  throughout  the  planes.  Celestials  are  good   by  nature,  so  the  exceptional  celestial  who  strays   from  a  good  alignment  is  a  horrifying  rarity.   Celestials  include  angels,  couatls,  and  pegasi.      Constructs  are  made,  not  born.  Some  are   programmed  by  their  creators  to  follow  a  simple  set   of  instructions,  while  others  are  imbued  with   sentience  and  capable  of  independent  thought.   Golems  are  the  iconic  constructs.  Many  creatures   native  to  the  outer  plane  of  Mechanus,  such  as   modrons,  are  constructs  shaped  from  the  raw   material  of  the  plane  by  the  will  of  more  powerful   creatures.      Dragons  are  large  reptilian  creatures  of  ancient   origin  and  tremendous  power.  True  dragons,   including  the  good  metallic  dragons  and  the  evil   chromatic  dragons,  are  highly  intelligent  and  have   innate  magic.  Also  in  this  category  are  creatures   distantly  related  to  true  dragons,  but  less  powerful,   less  intelligent,  and  less  magical,  such  as  wyverns   and  pseudodragons.      Elementals  are  creatures  native  to  the  elemental   planes.  Some  creatures  of  this  type  are  little  more   than  animate  masses  of  their  respective  elements,   including  the  creatures  simply  called  elementals.   Others  have  biological  forms  infused  with  elemental   energy.  The  races  of  genies,  including  djinn  and   efreet,  form  the  most  important  civilizations  on  the   elemental  planes.  Other  elemental  creatures  include   [-azers,  invisible  stalkers,-]   {+azers+}  and  [-water  weirds.-]  {+invisible  stalkers.+}      Fey  are  magical  creatures  closely  tied  to  the  forces   of  nature.  They  dwell  in  twilight  groves  and  misty   forests.  In  some  worlds,  they  are  closely  tied  to  the   Feywild,  also  called  the  Plane  of  Faerie.  Some  are   also  found  in  the  Outer  Planes,  particularly  the   planes  of  Arborea  and  the  Beastlands.  Fey  include   dryads,  pixies,  and  satyrs.      Fiends  are  creatures  of  wickedness  that  are  native   to  the  Lower  Planes.  A  few  are  the  servants  of  deities,   but  many  more  labor  under  the  leadership  of   archdevils  and  demon  princes.  Evil  priests  and   mages  sometimes  summon  fiends  to  the  material   world  to  do  their  bidding.  If  an  evil  celestial  is  a   rarity,  a  good  fiend  is  almost  inconceivable.  Fiends   include  demons,  devils,  hell  hounds,  rakshasas,  and   yugoloths.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

257-]  {+5.1  

254+}  

   Giants  tower  over  humans  and  their  kind.  They   are  humanlike  in  shape,  though  some  have  multiple   heads  (ettins)  or  deformities  (fomorians).  The  six   varieties  of  true  giant  are  hill  giants,  stone  giants,   frost  giants,  fire  giants,  cloud  giants,  and  storm   giants.  Besides  these,  creatures  such  as  ogres  and   trolls  are  giants.      Humanoids  are  the  main  peoples  of  a  fantasy   gaming  world,  both  civilized  and  savage,  including   humans  and  a  tremendous  variety  of  other  species.   They  have  language  and  culture,  few  if  any  innate   magical  abilities  (though  most  humanoids  can  learn   spellcasting),  and  a  bipedal  form.  The  most  common   humanoid  races  are  the  ones  most  suitable  as  player   characters:  humans,  dwarves,  elves,  and  halflings.   Almost  as  numerous  but  far  more  savage  and  brutal,   and  almost  uniformly  evil,  are  the  races  of  goblinoids   (goblins,  hobgoblins,  and  bugbears),  orcs,  gnolls,   lizardfolk,  and  kobolds.      Monstrosities  are  monsters  in  the  strictest   sense--frightening  creatures  that  are  not  ordinary,   not  truly  natural,  and  almost  never  benign.  Some  are   the  results  of  magical  experimentation  gone  awry   (such  as  owlbears),  and  others  are  the  product  of   terrible  curses  (including  minotaurs  and  yuan-ti).   They  defy  categorization,  and  in  some  sense  serve  as   a  catch-all  category  for  creatures  that  don't  fit  into   any  other  type.      Oozes  are  gelatinous  creatures  that  rarely  have  a   fixed  shape.  They  are  mostly  subterranean,  dwelling   in  caves  and  dungeons  and  feeding  on  refuse,  carrion,   or  creatures  unlucky  enough  to  get  in  their  way.   Black  puddings  and  gelatinous  cubes  are  among  the   most  recognizable  oozes.      Plants  in  this  context  are  vegetable  creatures,  not   ordinary  flora.  Most  of  them  are  ambulatory,  and   some  are  carnivorous.  The  quintessential  plants  are   the  shambling  mound  and  the  treant.  Fungal   creatures  such  as  the  gas  spore  and  the  myconid  also   fall  into  this  category.      Undead  are  once-living  creatures  brought  to  a   horrifying  state  of  undeath  through  the  practice  of   necromantic  magic  or  some  unholy  curse.  Undead   include  walking  corpses,  such  as  vampires  and   zombies,  as  well  as  bodiless  spirits,  such  as  ghosts   and  specters.  
Tags
A  monster  might  have  one  or  more  tags  appended  to   its  type,  in  parentheses.  For  example,  an  orc  has  the   humanoid  (orc)  type.  The  parenthetical  tags  provide   additional  categorization  for  certain  creatures.  The   tags  have  no  rules  of  their  own,  but  something  in  the  

game,  such  as  a  magic  item,  might  refer  to  them.  For   instance,  a  spear  that  is  especially  effective  at   fighting  demons  would  work  against  any  monster   that  has  the  demon  tag.  
Alignment
A  monster's  alignment  provides  a  clue  to  its   disposition  and  how  it  behaves  in  a  roleplaying  or   combat  situation.  For  example,  a  chaotic  evil   monster  might  be  difficult  to  reason  with  and  might   attack  characters  on  sight,  whereas  a  neutral   monster  might  be  willing  to  negotiate.  See  the   Player's  Handbook  for  descriptions  of  the  different   alignments.      The  alignment  specified  in  a  monster's  stat  block   is  the  default.  Feel  free  to  depart  from  it  and  change   a  monster's  alignment  to  suit  the  needs  of  your   campaign.  If  you  want  a  good-aligned  green  dragon   or  an  evil  storm  giant,  there's  nothing  stopping  you.      Some  creatures  can  have  any  alignment.  In  other   words,  you  choose  the  monster's  alignment.  Some   monster's  alignment  entry  indicates  a  tendency  or   aversion  toward  law,  chaos,  good,  or  evil.  For   example,  a  berserker  can  be  any  chaotic  alignment   (chaotic  good,  chaotic  neutral,  or  chaotic  evil),  as   befits  its  wild  nature.      Many  creatures  of  low  intelligence  have  no   comprehension  of  law  or  chaos,  good  or  evil.  They   don't  make  moral  or  ethical  choices,  but  rather  act   on  instinct.  These  creatures  are  unaligned,  which   means  they  don't  have  an  alignment.  
Armor Class
A  monster  that  wears  armor  or  carries  a  shield  has   an  Armor  Class  (AC)  that  takes  its  armor,  shield,  and   Dexterity  into  account.  Otherwise,  a  monster's  AC  is   based  on  its  Dexterity  modifier  and  natural  armor,  if   any.  If  a  monster  has  natural  armor,  wears  armor,  or   carries  a  shield,  this  is  noted  in  parentheses  after  its   AC  value.  
Hit Points
A  monster  usually  dies  or  is  destroyed  when  it  drops   to  0  hit  points.  For  more  on  hit  points,  see  the   Player's  Handbook.      A  monster's  hit  points  are  presented  both  as  a  die   expression  and  as  an  average  number.  For  example,   a  monster  with  2d8  hit  points  has  9  hit  points  on   average  (2  ×  4½).      A  monster's  size  determines  the  die  used  to   calculate  its  hit  points,  as  shown  in  the  Hit  Dice  by   Size  table.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

258-]  {+5.1  

255+}  

Hit  Dice  by  Size  

Monster  Size   Hit  Die   Average  HP  per  Die  

Tiny  

d4   2½  

Small   d6   3½  

Medium  

d8  

4½  

Large  

d10  

5½  

Huge   d12   6½  

Gargantuan   d20  

10½  

  

   A  monster's  Constitution  modifier  also  affects  the  

number  of  hit  points  it  has.  Its  Constitution  modifier  

is  multiplied  by  the  number  of  Hit  Dice  it  possesses,  

and  the  result  is  added  to  its  hit  points.  For  example,  

if  a  monster  has  a  Constitution  of  12  (+1  modifier)  

and  2d8  Hit  Dice,  it  has  2d8  +  2  hit  points  (average  

11).  

Speed

A  monster's  speed  tells  you  how  far  it  can  move  on   its  turn.  For  more  information  on  speed,  see  the   Player's  Handbook.      All  creatures  have  a  walking  speed,  simply  called   the  monster's  speed.  Creatures  that  have  no  form  of   ground-based  locomotion  have  a  walking  speed  of  0   feet.      Some  creatures  have  one  or  more  of  the  following   additional  movement  modes.  

Burrow
A  monster  that  has  a  burrowing  speed  can  use  that   speed  to  move  through  sand,  earth,  mud,  or  ice.  A   monster  can't  burrow  through  solid  rock  unless  it   has  a  special  trait  that  allows  it  to  do  so.  

Climb
A  monster  that  has  a  climbing  speed  can  use  all  or   part  of  its  movement  to  move  on  vertical  surfaces.   The  monster  doesn't  need  to  spend  extra  movement   to  climb.  

Fly
A  monster  that  has  a  flying  speed  can  use  all  or  part   of  its  movement  to  fly.  Some  monsters  have  the   ability  to  hover,  which  makes  them  hard  to  knock   out  of  the  air  (as  explained  in  the  rules  on  flying  in   the  Player's  Handbook).  Such  a  monster  stops   hovering  when  it  dies.  

Swim
A  monster  that  has  a  swimming  speed  doesn't  need  
to  spend  extra  movement  to  swim.  

Ability Scores

Every  monster  has  six  ability  scores  (Strength,   Dexterity,  Constitution,  Intelligence,  Wisdom,  and   Charisma)  and  corresponding  modifiers.  For  more   information  on  ability  scores  and  how  they're  used   in  play,  see  the  Player's  Handbook.  

Saving Throws

The  Saving  Throws  entry  is  reserved  for  creatures   that  are  adept  at  resisting  certain  kinds  of  effects.   For  example,  a  creature  that  isn't  easily  charmed  or   frightened  might  gain  a  bonus  on  its  Wisdom  saving   throws.  Most  creatures  don't  have  special  saving   throw  bonuses,  in  which  case  this  section  is  absent.      A  saving  throw  bonus  is  the  sum  of  a  monster's   relevant  ability  modifier  and  its  proficiency  bonus,   which  is  determined  by  the  monster's  challenge   rating  (as  shown  in  the  Proficiency  Bonus  by   Challenge  Rating  table).  

Proficiency  Bonus  by  Challenge  Rating  

Proficiency  

Proficiency  

Challenge   Bonus      Challenge   Bonus  

0  

+2      14  

+5  

1/8   +2      15   +5  

1/4   +2      16   +5  

1/2   +2      17   +6  

1  

+2      18  

+6  

2  

+2      19  

+6  

3  

+2      20  

+6  

4  

+2      21  

+7  

5  

+3      22  

+7  

6  

+3      23  

+7  

7  

+3      24  

+7  

8  

+3      25  

+8  

9  

+4      26  

+8  

10   +4      27   +8  

11   +4      28   +8  

12   +4      29   +9  

13   +5      30   +9  

  

Skills

The  Skills  entry  is  reserved  for  monsters  that  are   proficient  in  one  or  more  skills.  For  example,  a   monster  that  is  very  perceptive  and  stealthy  might   have  bonuses  to  Wisdom  (Perception)  and  Dexterity   (Stealth)  checks.      A  skill  bonus  is  the  sum  of  a  monster's  relevant   ability  modifier  and  its  proficiency  bonus,  which  is   determined  by  the  monster's  challenge  rating  (as   shown  in  the  Proficiency  Bonus  by  Challenge  Rating   table).  Other  modifiers  might  apply.  For  instance,  a  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

259-]  {+5.1  

256+}  

monster  might  have  a  larger-than-expected  bonus   (usually  double  its  proficiency  bonus)  to  account  for   its  heightened  expertise.  
Vulnerabilities, Resistances, and Immunities
Some  creatures  have  vulnerability,  resistance,  or   immunity  to  certain  types  of  damage.  Particular   creatures  are  even  resistant  or  immune  to  damage   from  nonmagical  attacks  (a  magical  attack  is  an   attack  delivered  by  a  spell,  a  magic  item,  or  another   magical  source).  In  addition,  some  creatures  are   immune  to  certain  conditions.  
Senses
The  Senses  entry  notes  a  monster's  passive  Wisdom   (Perception)  score,  as  well  as  any  special  senses  the   monster  might  have.  Special  senses  are  described   below.  
Blindsight
A  monster  with  blindsight  can  perceive  its   surroundings  without  relying  on  sight,  within  a   specific  radius.        Creatures  without  eyes,  such  as  grimlocks  and   gray  oozes,  typically  have  this  special  sense,  as  do   creatures  with  echolocation  or  heightened  senses,   such  as  bats  and  true  dragons.      If  a  monster  is  naturally  blind,  it  has  a   parenthetical  note  to  this  effect,  indicating  that  the   radius  of  its  blindsight  defines  the  maximum  range   of  its  perception.    
Darkvision
A  monster  with  darkvision  can  see  in  the  dark  within   a  specific  radius.  The  monster  can  see  in  dim  light   within  the  radius  as  if  it  were  bright  light,  and  in   darkness  as  if  it  were  dim  light.  The  monster  can't   discern  color  in  darkness,  only  shades  of  gray.  Many   creatures  that  live  underground  have  this  special   sense.  
Armor, Weapon, and Tool Proficiencies
Assume  that  a  creature  is  proficient  with  its  armor,  weapons,   and  tools.  If  you  swap  them  out,  you  decide  whether  the   creature  is  proficient  with  its  new  equipment.      For  example,  a  hill  giant  typically  wears  hide  armor  and   wields  a  greatclub.  You  could  equip  a  hill  giant  with  chain   mail  and  a  greataxe  instead,  and  assume  the  giant  is   proficient  with  both,  one  or  the  other,  or  neither.      See  the  Player's  Handbook  for  rules  on  using  armor  or   weapons  without  proficiency.  

Tremorsense
A  monster  with  tremorsense  can  detect  and  pinpoint   the  origin  of  vibrations  within  a  specific  radius,   provided  that  the  monster  and  the  source  of  the   vibrations  are  in  contact  with  the  same  ground  or   substance.  Tremorsense  can't  be  used  to  detect   flying  or  incorporeal  creatures.  Many  burrowing   creatures,  such  as  ankhegs  and  umber  hulks,  have   this  special  sense.  
Truesight
A  monster  with  truesight  can,  out  to  a  specific  range,   see  in  normal  and  magical  darkness,  see  invisible   creatures  and  objects,  automatically  detect  visual   illusions  and  succeed  on  saving  throws  against  them,   and  perceive  the  original  form  of  a  shapechanger  or   a  creature  that  is  transformed  by  magic.   Furthermore,  the  monster  can  see  into  the  Ethereal   Plane  within  the  same  range.  
Languages
The  languages  that  a  monster  can  speak  are  listed  in   alphabetical  order.  Sometimes  a  monster  can   understand  a  language  but  can't  speak  it,  and  this  is   noted  in  its  entry.  A  "--"  indicates  that  a  creature   neither  speaks  nor  understands  any  language.    
Telepathy
Telepathy  is  a  magical  ability  that  allows  a  monster   to  communicate  mentally  with  another  creature   within  a  specified  range.  The  contacted  creature   doesn't  need  to  share  a  language  with  the  monster  to   communicate  in  this  way  with  it,  but  it  must  be  able   to  understand  at  least  one  language.  A  creature   without  telepathy  can  receive  and  respond  to   telepathic  messages  but  can't  initiate  or  terminate  a   telepathic  conversation.      A  telepathic  monster  doesn't  need  to  see  a   contacted  creature  and  can  end  the  telepathic   contact  at  any  time.  The  contact  is  broken  as  soon  as   the  two  creatures  are  no  longer  within  range  of  each   other  or  if  the  telepathic  monster  contacts  a   different  creature  within  range.  A  telepathic  monster   can  initiate  or  terminate  a  telepathic  conversation   without  using  an  action,  but  while  the  monster  is   incapacitated,  it  can't  initiate  telepathic  contact,  and   any  current  contact  is  terminated.      A  creature  within  the  area  of  an  antimagic  field  or   in  any  other  location  where  magic  doesn't  function   can't  send  or  receive  telepathic  messages.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

260-]  {+5.1  

257+}  

Challenge

A  monster's  challenge  rating  tells  you  how  great  a   threat  the  monster  is.  An  appropriately  equipped   and  well-rested  party  of  four  adventurers  should  be   able  to  defeat  a  monster  that  has  a  challenge  rating   equal  to  its  level  without  suffering  any  deaths.  For   example,  a  party  of  four  3rd-level  characters  should   find  a  monster  with  a  challenge  rating  of  3  to  be  a   worthy  challenge,  but  not  a  deadly  one.      Monsters  that  are  significantly  weaker  than  1st- level  characters  have  a  challenge  rating  lower  than  1.   Monsters  with  a  challenge  rating  of  0  are   insignificant  except  in  large  numbers;  those  with  no   effective  attacks  are  worth  no  experience  points,   while  those  that  have  attacks  are  worth  10  XP  each.      Some  monsters  present  a  greater  challenge  than   even  a  typical  20th-level  party  can  handle.  These   monsters  have  a  challenge  rating  of  21  or  higher  and   are  specifically  designed  to  test  player  skill.  

Experience Points
The  number  of  experience  points  (XP)  a  monster  is   worth  is  based  on  its  challenge  rating.  Typically,  XP   is  awarded  for  defeating  the  monster,  although  the   GM  may  also  award  XP  for  neutralizing  the  threat   posed  by  the  monster  in  some  other  manner.      Unless  something  tells  you  otherwise,  a  monster   summoned  by  a  spell  or  other  magical  ability  is   worth  the  XP  noted  in  its  stat  block.  

Experience  Points  by  Challenge  Rating  

Challenge   XP      Challenge   XP  

0  

0  or  10     

14  

11,500  

1/8  

25     

15  

13,000  

1/4  

50     

16  

15,000  

1/2  

100     

17  

18,000  

1  

200     

18  

20,000  

2  

450     

19  

22,000  

3  

700     

20  

25,000  

4  

1,100     

21  

33,000  

5  

1,800     

22  

41,000  

6  

2,300     

23  

50,000  

7  

2,900     

24  

62,000  

8  

3,900     

25  

75,000  

9  

5,000     

26  

90,000  

10   5,900      27   105,000  

11   7,200      28   120,000  

12   8,400      29   135,000  

13   10,000      30   155,000  

  

Special Traits
Special  traits  (which  appear  after  a  monster's   challenge  rating  but  before  any  actions  or  reactions)   are  characteristics  that  are  likely  to  be  relevant  in  a   combat  encounter  and  that  require  some   explanation.  
Innate Spellcasting
A  monster  with  the  innate  ability  to  cast  spells  has   the  Innate  Spellcasting  special  trait.  Unless  noted   otherwise,  an  innate  spell  of  1st  level  or  higher  is   always  cast  at  its  lowest  possible  level  and  can't  be   cast  at  a  higher  level.  If  a  monster  has  a  cantrip   where  its  level  matters  and  no  level  is  given,  use  the   monster's  challenge  rating.      An  innate  spell  can  have  special  rules  or   restrictions.  For  example,  a  drow  mage  can  innately   cast  the  levitate  spell,  but  the  spell  has  a  "self  only"   restriction,  which  means  that  the  spell  affects  only   the  drow  mage.      A  monster's  innate  spells  can't  be  swapped  out   with  other  spells.  If  a  monster's  innate  spells  don't   require  attack  rolls,  no  attack  bonus  is  given  for   them.  
Spellcasting
A  monster  with  the  Spellcasting  special  trait  has  a   spellcaster  level  and  spell  slots,  which  it  uses  to  cast   its  spells  of  1st  level  and  higher  (as  explained  in  the   Player's  Handbook).  The  spellcaster  level  is  also  used   for  any  cantrips  included  in  the  feature.      The  monster  has  a  list  of  spells  known  or  prepared   from  a  specific  class.  The  list  might  also  include   spells  from  a  feature  in  that  class,  such  as  the  Divine   Domain  feature  of  the  cleric  or  the  Druid  Circle   feature  of  the  druid.  The  monster  is  considered  a   member  of  that  class  when  attuning  to  or  using  a   magic  item  that  requires  membership  in  the  class  or   access  to  its  spell  list.      A  monster  can  cast  a  spell  from  its  list  at  a  higher   level  if  it  has  the  spell  slot  to  do  so.  For  example,  a   drow  mage  with  the  3rd-level  lightning  bolt  spell  can   cast  it  as  a  5th-level  spell  by  using  one  of  its  5th-level   spell  slots.      You  can  change  the  spells  that  a  monster  knows  or   has  prepared,  replacing  any  spell  on  its  spell  list  with   a  spell  of  the  same  level  and  from  the  same  class  list.   If  you  do  so,  you  might  cause  the  monster  to  be  a   greater  or  lesser  threat  than  suggested  by  its   challenge  rating.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

261-]  {+5.1  

258+}  

Psionics
A  monster  that  casts  spells  using  only  the  power  of   its  mind  has  the  psionics  tag  added  to  its  Spellcasting   or  Innate  Spellcasting  special  trait.  This  tag  carries   no  special  rules  of  its  own,  but  other  parts  of  the   game  might  refer  to  it.  A  monster  that  has  this  tag   typically  doesn't  require  any  components  to  cast  its   spells.  
Actions
When  a  monster  takes  its  action,  it  can  choose  from   the  options  in  the  Actions  section  of  its  stat  block  or   use  one  of  the  actions  available  to  all  creatures,  such   as  the  Dash  or  Hide  action,  as  described  in  the   Player's  Handbook.  
Melee and Ranged Attacks
The  most  common  actions  that  a  monster  will  take   in  combat  are  melee  and  ranged  attacks.  These  can   be  spell  attacks  or  weapon  attacks,  where  the   "weapon"  might  be  a  manufactured  item  or  a  natural   weapon,  such  as  a  claw  or  tail  spike.  For  more   information  on  different  kinds  of  attacks,  see  the   Player's  Handbook.      Creature  vs.  Target.  The  target  of  a  melee  or   ranged  attack  is  usually  either  one  creature  or  one   target,  the  difference  being  that  a  "target"  can  be  a   creature  or  an  object.      Hit.  Any  damage  dealt  or  other  effects  that  occur   as  a  result  of  an  attack  hitting  a  target  are  described   after  the  "Hit"  notation.  You  have  the  option  of   taking  average  damage  or  rolling  the  damage;  for   this  reason,  both  the  average  damage  and  the  die   expression  are  presented.      Miss.  If  an  attack  has  an  effect  that  occurs  on  a   miss,  that  information  is  presented  after  the  "Miss:"   notation.  
Multiattack
A  creature  that  can  make  multiple  attacks  on  its  turn   has  the  Multiattack  action.  A  creature  can't  use   Multiattack  when  making  an  opportunity  attack,   which  must  be  a  single  melee  attack.  
Ammunition
A  monster  carries  enough  ammunition  to  make  its   ranged  attacks.  You  can  assume  that  a  monster  has   2d4  pieces  of  ammunition  for  a  thrown  weapon   attack,  and  2d10  pieces  of  ammunition  for  a   projectile  weapon  such  as  a  bow  or  crossbow.  

Reactions
If  a  monster  can  do  something  special  with  its   reaction,  that  information  is  contained  here.  If  a   creature  has  no  special  reaction,  this  section  is   absent.  
Limited Usage
Some  special  abilities  have  restrictions  on  the   number  of  times  they  can  be  used.      X/Day.  The  notation  "X/Day"  means  a  special   ability  can  be  used  X  number  of  times  and  that  a   monster  must  finish  a  long  rest  to  regain  expended   uses.  For  example,  "1/Day"  means  a  special  ability   can  be  used  once  and  that  the  monster  must  finish  a   long  rest  to  use  it  again.      Recharge  X­Y.  The  notation  "Recharge  X­Y"   means  a  monster  can  use  a  special  ability  once  and   that  the  ability  then  has  a  random  chance  of   recharging  during  each  subsequent  round  of  combat.   At  the  start  of  each  of  the  monster's  turns,  roll  a  d6.   If  the  roll  is  one  of  the  numbers  in  the  recharge   notation,  the  monster  regains  the  use  of  the  special   ability.  The  ability  also  recharges  when  the  monster   finishes  a  short  or  long  rest.      For  example,  "Recharge  5­6"  means  a  monster  can   use  the  special  ability  once.  Then,  at  the  start  of  the   monster's  turn,  it  regains  the  use  of  that  ability  if  it   rolls  a  5  or  6  on  a  d6.      Recharge  after  a  Short  or  Long  Rest.  This   notation  means  that  a  monster  can  use  a  special   ability  once  and  then  must  finish  a  short  or  long  rest   to  use  it  again.  
Grapple Rules for Monsters
Many  monsters  have  special  attacks  that  allow  them  to   quickly  grapple  prey.  When  a  monster  hits  with  such  an   attack,  it  doesn't  need  to  make  an  additional  ability  check  to   determine  whether  the  grapple  succeeds,  unless  the  attack   says  otherwise.      A  creature  grappled  by  the  monster  can  use  its  action  to   try  to  escape.  To  do  so,  it  must  succeed  on  a  Strength   (Athletics)  or  Dexterity  (Acrobatics)  check  against  the  escape   DC  in  the  monster's  stat  block.  If  no  escape  DC  is  given,   assume  the  DC  is  10  +  the  monster's  Strength  (Athletics)   modifier.  
Equipment
A  stat  block  rarely  refers  to  equipment,  other  than   armor  or  weapons  used  by  a  monster.  A  creature   that  customarily  wears  clothes,  such  as  a  humanoid,   is  assumed  to  be  dressed  appropriately.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

262-]  {+5.1  

259+}  

   You  can  equip  monsters  with  additional  gear  and   trinkets  however  you  like,  and  you  decide  how  much   of  a  monster's  equipment  is  recoverable  after  the   creature  is  slain  and  whether  any  of  that  equipment   is  still  usable.  A  battered  suit  of  armor  made  for  a   monster  is  rarely  usable  by  someone  else,  for   instance.      If  a  spellcasting  monster  needs  material   components  to  cast  its  spells,  assume  that  it  has  the   material  components  it  needs  to  cast  the  spells  in  its   stat  block.  
Legendary Creatures
A  legendary  creature  can  do  things  that  ordinary   creatures  can't.  It  can  take  special  actions  outside  its   turn,  and  it  might  exert  magical  influence  for  miles   around.      If  a  creature  assumes  the  form  of  a  legendary   creature,  such  as  through  a  spell,  it  doesn't  gain  that   form's  legendary  actions,  lair  actions,  or  regional   effects.  
Legendary Actions
A  legendary  creature  can  take  a  certain  number  of   special  actions--called  legendary  actions--outside   its  turn.  Only  one  legendary  action  option  can  be   used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of  another   creature's  turn.  A  creature  regains  its  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  It  can  forgo   using  them,  and  it  can't  use  them  while  incapacitated   or  otherwise  unable  to  take  actions.  If  surprised,  it   can't  use  them  until  after  its  first  turn  in  the  combat.  
A Legendary Creature's Lair
A  legendary  creature  might  have  a  section   describing  its  lair  and  the  special  effects  it  can  create   while  there,  either  by  act  of  will  or  simply  by  being   present.  Such  a  section  applies  only  to  a  legendary   creature  that  spends  a  great  deal  of  time  in  its  lair.  
Lair Actions
If  a  legendary  creature  has  lair  actions,  it  can  use   them  to  harness  the  ambient  magic  in  its  lair.  On   initiative  count  20  (losing  all  initiative  ties),  it  can   use  one  of  its  lair  action  options.  It  can't  do  so  while   incapacitated  or  otherwise  unable  to  take  actions.  If   surprised,  it  can't  use  one  until  after  its  first  turn  in   the  combat.  
Regional Effects
The  mere  presence  of  a  legendary  creature  can  have   strange  and  wondrous  effects  on  its  environment,  as  

noted  in  this  section.  Regional  effects  end  abruptly   or  dissipate  over  time  when  the  legendary  creature   dies.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

263-]  {+5.1  

260+}  

Monsters (A)
  
Aboleth  
Large  aberration,  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  135  (18d10  +  36)  
Speed  10  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   21  (+5)   9  (-1)   15  (+2)   18  (+4)   15  (+2)   18  (+4)  
Saving  Throws  Con  +6,  Int  +8,  Wis  +6  
Skills  History  +12,  Perception  +10  
Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  20  
Languages  Deep  Speech,  telepathy  120  ft.  
Challenge  10  (5,900  XP)  
  
Amphibious.  The  aboleth  can  breathe  air  and  water.  
Mucous  Cloud.  While  underwater,  the  aboleth  is   surrounded  by  transformative  mucus.  A  creature  that   touches  the  aboleth  or  that  hits  it  with  a  melee  attack   while  within  5  feet  of  it  must  make  a  DC  14   Constitution  saving  throw.  On  a  failure,  the  creature  is   diseased  for  1d4  hours.  The  diseased  creature  can   breathe  only  underwater.  
Probing  Telepathy.  If  a  creature  communicates   telepathically  with  the  aboleth,  the  aboleth  learns  the   creature's  greatest  desires  if  the  aboleth  can  see  the   creature.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  aboleth  makes  three  tentacle  attacks.  
Tentacle.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  12  (2d6  +  5)  bludgeoning  damage.  If   the  target  is  a  creature,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  14   Constitution  saving  throw  or  become  diseased.  The   disease  has  no  effect  for  1  minute  and  can  be  removed   by  any  magic  that  cures  disease.  After  1  minute,  the   diseased  creature's  skin  becomes  translucent  and  slimy,   the  creature  can't  regain  hit  points  unless  it  is   underwater,  and  the  disease  can  be  removed  only  by   heal  or  another  disease-curing  spell  of  6th  level  or   higher.  When  the  creature  is  outside  a  body  of  water,  it   takes  6  (1d12)  acid  damage  every  10  minutes  unless   moisture  is  applied  to  the  skin  before  10  minutes  have   passed.  

Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.  one   target.  Hit:  15  (3d6  +  5)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Enslave  (3/Day).  The  aboleth  targets  one  creature  it   can  see  within  30  feet  of  it.  The  target  must  succeed  on   a  DC  14  Wisdom  saving  throw  or  be  magically  charmed   by  the  aboleth  until  the  aboleth  dies  or  until  it  is  on  a   different  plane  of  existence  from  the  target.  The   charmed  target  is  under  the  aboleth's  control  and  can't   take  reactions,  and  the  aboleth  and  the  target  can   communicate  telepathically  with  each  other  over  any   distance.      Whenever  the  charmed  target  takes  damage,  the   target  can  repeat  the  saving  throw.  On  a  success,  the   effect  ends.  No  more  than  once  every  24  hours,  the   target  can  also  repeat  the  saving  throw  when  it  is  at   least  1  mile  away  from  the  aboleth.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  aboleth  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  aboleth  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Detect.  The  aboleth  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)   check.  
Tail  Swipe.  The  aboleth  makes  one  tail  attack.  
Psychic  Drain  (Costs  2  Actions).  One  creature  charmed   by  the  aboleth  takes  10  (3d6)  psychic  damage,  and   the  aboleth  regains  hit  points  equal  to  the  damage   the  creature  takes.  
  
Angels
Deva  
Medium  celestial,  lawful  good  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  136  (16d8  +  64)  
Speed  30  ft.,  fly  90  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   18  (+4)   18  (+4)   18  (+4)   17  (+3)   20  (+5)   20  (+5)  
Saving  Throws  Wis  +9,  Cha  +9  
Skills  Insight  +9,  Perception  +9  
Damage  Resistances  radiant;  bludgeoning,  piercing,   and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  
Condition  Immunities  charmed,  exhaustion,  frightened  
Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  19  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

264-]  {+5.1  

261+}  

Languages  all,  telepathy  120  ft.  
Challenge  10  (5,900  XP)  
    
Angelic  Weapons.  The  deva's  weapon  attacks  are   magical.  When  the  deva  hits  with  any  weapon,  the   weapon  deals  an  extra  4d8  radiant  damage  (included  in   the  attack).  
Innate  Spellcasting.  The  deva's  spellcasting  ability  is   Charisma  (spell  save  DC  17).  The  deva  can  innately  cast   the  following  spells,  requiring  only  verbal  components:  
At  will:  detect  evil  and  good  
1/day  each:  commune,  raise  dead  
Magic  Resistance.  The  deva  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  deva  makes  two  melee  attacks.  
Mace.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (1d6  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage  plus  18   (4d8)  radiant  damage.  
Healing  Touch  (3/Day).  The  deva  touches  another   creature.  The  target  magically  regains  20  (4d8  +  2)  hit   points  and  is  freed  from  any  curse,  disease,  poison,   blindness,  or  deafness.  
Change  Shape.  The  deva  magically  polymorphs  into  a   humanoid  or  beast  that  has  a  challenge  rating  equal  to   or  less  than  its  own,  or  back  into  its  true  form.  It   reverts  to  its  true  form  if  it  dies.  Any  equipment  it  is   wearing  or  carrying  is  absorbed  or  borne  by  the  new   form  (the  deva's  choice).      In  a  new  form,  the  deva  retains  its  game  statistics   and  ability  to  speak,  but  its  AC,  movement  modes,   Strength,  Dexterity,  and  special  senses  are  replaced  by   those  of  the  new  form,  and  it  gains  any  statistics  and   capabilities  (except  class  features,  legendary  actions,   and  lair  actions)  that  the  new  form  has  but  that  it  lacks.  
  
Planetar  
Large  celestial,  lawful  good    
Armor  Class  19  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  200  (16d10  +  112)  
Speed  40  ft.,  fly  120  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   24  (+7)   20  (+5)   24  (+7)   19  (+4)   22  (+6)   25  (+7)  

Saving  Throws  Con  +12,  Wis  +11,  Cha  +12   Skills  Perception  +11   Damage  Resistances  radiant;  bludgeoning,  piercing,  
and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  exhaustion,  frightened   Senses  truesight  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  21   Languages  all,  telepathy  120  ft.   Challenge  16  (15,000  XP)      Angelic  Weapons.  The  planetar's  weapon  attacks  are   magical.  When  the  planetar  hits  with  any  weapon,  the   weapon  deals  an  extra  5d8  radiant  damage  (included  in   the  attack).   Divine  Awareness.  The  planetar  knows  if  it  hears  a  lie.   Innate  Spellcasting.  The  planetar's  spellcasting  ability   is  Charisma  (spell  save  DC  20).  The  planetar  can   innately  cast  the  following  spells,  requiring  no  material   components:   At  will:  detect  evil  and  good,  invisibility  (self  only)   3/day  each:  blade  barrier,  dispel  evil  and  good,  flame  
strike,  raise  dead   1/day  each:  commune,  control  weather,  insect  plague   Magic  Resistance.  The  planetar  has  advantage  on   saving  throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  planetar  makes  two  melee  attacks.   Greatsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +12  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  21  (4d6  +  7)  slashing  damage  plus   22  (5d8)  radiant  damage.   Healing  Touch  (4/Day).  The  planetar  touches  another   creature.  The  target  magically  regains  30  (6d8  +  3)  hit   points  and  is  freed  from  any  curse,  disease,  poison,   blindness,  or  deafness.     
Solar  
Large  celestial,  lawful  good  
Armor  Class  21  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  243  (18d10  +  144)   Speed  50  ft.,  fly  150  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      26  (+8)   22  (+6)   26  (+8)   25  (+7)   25  (+7)   30  (+10)  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

265-]  {+5.1  

262+}  

Saving  Throws  Int  +14,  Wis  +14,  Cha  +17  
Skills  Perception  +14  
Damage  Resistances  radiant;  bludgeoning,  piercing,   and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  
Damage  Immunities  necrotic,  poison  
Condition  Immunities  charmed,  exhaustion,  frightened,   poisoned  
Senses  truesight  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  24  
Languages  all,  telepathy  120  ft.  
Challenge  21  (33,000  XP)  
    
Angelic  Weapons.  The  solar's  weapon  attacks  are   magical.  When  the  solar  hits  with  any  weapon,  the   weapon  deals  an  extra  6d8  radiant  damage  (included  in   the  attack).  
Divine  Awareness.  The  solar  knows  if  it  hears  a  lie.  
Innate  Spellcasting.  The  solar's  spellcasting  ability  is   Charisma  (spell  save  DC  25).  It  can  innately  cast  the   following  spells,  requiring  no  material  components:  
At  will:  detect  evil  and  good,  invisibility  (self  only)  
3/day  each:  blade  barrier,  dispel  evil  and  good,   resurrection  
1/day  each:  commune,  control  weather  
Magic  Resistance.  The  solar  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  solar  makes  two  greatsword  attacks.  
Greatsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +15  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  22  (4d6  +  8)  slashing  damage  plus   27  (6d8)  radiant  damage.  
Slaying  Longbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +13  to  hit,   range  150/600  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  15  (2d8  +  6)  piercing   damage  plus  27  (6d8)  radiant  damage.  If  the  target  is  a   creature  that  has  100  hit  points  or  fewer,  it  must   succeed  on  a  DC  15  Constitution  saving  throw  or  die.  
Flying  Sword.  The  solar  releases  its  greatsword  to   hover  magically  in  an  unoccupied  space  within  5  feet  of   it.  If  the  solar  can  see  the  sword,  the  solar  can  mentally   command  it  as  a  bonus  action  to  fly  up  to  50  feet  and   either  make  one  attack  against  a  target  or  return  to  the   solar's  hands.  If  the  hovering  sword  is  targeted  by  any   effect,  the  solar  is  considered  to  be  holding  it.  The   hovering  sword  falls  if  the  solar  dies.  
Healing  Touch  (4/Day).  The  solar  touches  another   creature.  The  target  magically  regains  40  (8d8  +  4)  hit  

points  and  is  freed  from  any  curse,  disease,  poison,   blindness,  or  deafness.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  solar  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing  from   the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action  option   can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of  another   creature's  turn.  The  solar  regains  spent  legendary   actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Teleport.  The  solar  magically  teleports,  along  with  any   equipment  it  is  wearing  or  carrying,  up  to  120  feet  to   an  unoccupied  space  it  can  see.  
Searing  Burst  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  solar  emits   magical,  divine  energy.  Each  creature  of  its  choice  in   a  10-foot  radius  must  make  a  DC  23  Dexterity  saving   throw,  taking  14  (4d6)  fire  damage  plus  14  (4d6)   radiant  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Blinding  Gaze  (Costs  3  Actions).  The  solar  targets  one   creature  it  can  see  within  30  feet  of  it.  If  the  target   can  see  it,  the  target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  15   Constitution  saving  throw  or  be  blinded  until  magic   such  as  the  lesser  restoration  spell  removes  the   blindness.  
  
Animated Objects
Animated  Armor  
Medium  construct,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  18  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  33  (6d8  +  6)  
Speed  25  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   14  (+2)   11  (+0)   13  (+1)   1  (-5)   3  (-4)   1  (-5)  
Damage  Immunities  poison,  psychic  
Condition  Immunities  blinded,  charmed,  deafened,   exhaustion,  frightened,  paralyzed,  petrified,   poisoned  
Senses  blindsight  60  ft.  (blind  beyond  this  radius),   passive  Perception  6  
Languages  --  
Challenge  1  (200  XP)  
    
Antimagic  Susceptibility.  The  armor  is  incapacitated   while  in  the  area  of  an  antimagic  field.  If  targeted  by   dispel  magic,  the  armor  must  succeed  on  a  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

266-]  {+5.1  

263+}  

Constitution  saving  throw  against  the  caster's  spell   save  DC  or  fall  unconscious  for  1  minute.   False  Appearance.  While  the  armor  remains   motionless,  it  is  indistinguishable  from  a  normal  suit  of   armor.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  armor  makes  two  melee  attacks.   Slam.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Flying  Sword  
Small  construct,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  17  (5d6)   Speed  0  ft.,  fly  50  ft.  (hover)  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      12  (+1)   15  (+2)   11  (+0)   1  (-5)   5  (-3)   1  (-5)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +4   Damage  Immunities  poison,  psychic   Condition  Immunities  blinded,  charmed,  deafened,  
frightened,  paralyzed,  petrified,  poisoned   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.  (blind  beyond  this  radius),  
passive  Perception  7   Languages  --   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)        Antimagic  Susceptibility.  The  sword  is  incapacitated   while  in  the  area  of  an  antimagic  field.  If  targeted  by   dispel  magic,  the  sword  must  succeed  on  a   Constitution  saving  throw  against  the  caster's  spell   save  DC  or  fall  unconscious  for  1  minute.   False  Appearance.  While  the  sword  remains   motionless  and  isn't  flying,  it  is  indistinguishable  from  a   normal  sword.  
Actions  
Longsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d8  +  1)  slashing  damage.     
Rug  of  Smothering  
Large  construct,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12  

Hit  Points  33  (6d10)   Speed  10  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      17  (+3)   14  (+2)   10  (+0)   1  (-5)   3  (-4)   1  (-5)  
Damage  Immunities  poison,  psychic   Condition  Immunities  blinded,  charmed,  deafened,  
frightened,  paralyzed,  petrified,  poisoned   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.  (blind  beyond  this  radius),  
passive  Perception  6   Languages  --   Challenge  2  (450  XP)        Antimagic  Susceptibility.  The  rug  is  incapacitated  while   in  the  area  of  an  antimagic  field.  If  targeted  by  dispel   magic,  the  rug  must  succeed  on  a  Constitution  saving   throw  against  the  caster's  spell  save  DC  or  fall   unconscious  for  1  minute.   Damage  Transfer.  While  it  is  grappling  a  creature,  the   rug  takes  only  half  the  damage  dealt  to  it,  and  the   creature  grappled  by  the  rug  takes  the  other  half.   False  Appearance.  While  the  rug  remains  motionless,  it   is  indistinguishable  from  a  normal  rug.  
Actions  
Smother.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  Medium  or  smaller  creature.  Hit:  The  creature  is   grappled  (escape  DC  13).  Until  this  grapple  ends,  the   target  is  restrained,  blinded,  and  at  risk  of  suffocating,   and  the  rug  can't  smother  another  target.  In  addition,   at  the  start  of  each  of  the  target's  turns,  the  target   takes  10  (2d6  +  3)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Ankheg  
Large  monstrosity,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  14  (natural  armor),  11  while  prone   Hit  Points  39  (6d10  +  6)   Speed  30  ft.,  burrow  10  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      17  (+3)   11  (+0)   13  (+1)   1  (-5)   13  (+1)   6  (-2)  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  tremorsense  60  ft.,  passive   Perception  11  
Languages  --   Challenge  2  (450  XP)  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

267-]  {+5.1  

264+}  

Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  10  (2d6  +  3)  slashing  damage  plus  3  (1d6)   acid  damage.  If  the  target  is  a  Large  or  smaller  creature,   it  is  grappled  (escape  DC  13).  Until  this  grapple  ends,   the  ankheg  can  bite  only  the  grappled  creature  and  has   advantage  on  attack  rolls  to  do  so.  
Acid  Spray  (Recharge  6).  The  ankheg  spits  acid  in  a  line   that  is  30  feet  long  and  5  feet  wide,  provided  that  it  has   no  creature  grappled.  Each  creature  in  that  line  must   make  a  DC  13  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  10  (3d6)   acid  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage   on  a  successful  one.  
  
Azer  
Medium  elemental,  lawful  neutral  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor,  shield)  
Hit  Points  39  (6d8  +  12)  
Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      17  (+3)   12  (+1)   15  (+2)   12  (+1)   13  (+1)   10  (+0)  
Saving  Throws  Con  +4  
Damage  Immunities  fire,  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned   Senses  passive  Perception  11  
Languages  Ignan   Challenge  2  (450  XP)       
Heated  Body.  A  creature  that  touches  the  azer  or  hits  it   with  a  melee  attack  while  within  5  feet  of  it  takes  5   (1d10)  fire  damage.  
Heated  Weapons.  When  the  azer  hits  with  a  metal   melee  weapon,  it  deals  an  extra  3  (1d6)  fire  damage   (included  in  the  attack).  
Illumination.  The  azer  sheds  bright  light  in  a  10-foot   radius  and  dim  light  for  an  additional  10  feet.  
Actions  
Warhammer.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  7  (1d8  +  3)  bludgeoning  damage,  or   8  (1d10  +  3)  bludgeoning  damage  if  used  with  two   hands  to  make  a  melee  attack,  plus  3  (1d6)  fire  damage.  
  

Monsters (B)
  
Basilisk  
Medium  monstrosity,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  15  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  52  (8d8  +  16)  
Speed  20  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   16  (+3)   8  (-1)   15  (+2)   2  (-4)   8  (-1)   7  (-2)  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  9  
Languages  --  
Challenge  3  (700  XP)  
    
Petrifying  Gaze.  If  a  creature  starts  its  turn  within  30   feet  of  the  basilisk  and  the  two  of  them  can  see  each   other,  the  basilisk  can  force  the  creature  to  make  a  DC   12  Constitution  saving  throw  if  the  basilisk  isn't   incapacitated.  On  a  failed  save,  the  creature  magically   begins  to  turn  to  stone  and  is  restrained.  It  must  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  its  next  turn.  On  a   success,  the  effect  ends.  On  a  failure,  the  creature  is   petrified  until  freed  by  the  greater  restoration  spell  or   other  magic.      A  creature  that  isn't  surprised  can  avert  its  eyes  to   avoid  the  saving  throw  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  If  it  does   so,  it  can't  see  the  basilisk  until  the  start  of  its  next  turn,   when  it  can  avert  its  eyes  again.  If  it  looks  at  the   basilisk  in  the  meantime,  it  must  immediately  make  the   save.  
   If  the  basilisk  sees  its  reflection  within  30  feet  of  it  in   bright  light,  it  mistakes  itself  for  a  rival  and  targets   itself  with  its  gaze.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  10  (2d6  +  3)  piercing  damage  plus  7  (2d6)   poison  damage.  
  
Behir  
Huge  monstrosity,  neutral  evil    
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  168  (16d12  +  64)  
Speed  50  ft.,  climb  40  ft.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

268-]  {+5.1  

265+}  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   23  (+6)   16  (+3)   18  (+4)   7  (-2)   14  (+2)   12  (+1)  
Skills  Perception  +6,  Stealth  +7  
Damage  Immunities  lightning  
Senses  darkvision  90  ft.,  passive  Perception  16  
Languages  Draconic  
Challenge  11  (7,200  XP)  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  behir  makes  two  attacks:  one  with  its   bite  and  one  to  constrict.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  22  (3d10  +  6)  piercing  damage.  
Constrict.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  Large  or  smaller  creature.  Hit:  17  (2d10  +  6)   bludgeoning  damage  plus  17  (2d10  +  6)  slashing   damage.  The  target  is  grappled  (escape  DC  16)  if  the   behir  isn't  already  constricting  a  creature,  and  the   target  is  restrained  until  this  grapple  ends.  
Lightning  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  behir  exhales  a   line  of  lightning  that  is  20  feet  long  and  5  feet  wide.   Each  creature  in  that  line  must  make  a  DC  16  Dexterity   saving  throw,  taking  66  (12d10)  lightning  damage  on  a   failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Swallow.  The  behir  makes  one  bite  attack  against  a   Medium  or  smaller  target  it  is  grappling.  If  the  attack   hits,  the  target  is  also  swallowed,  and  the  grapple  ends.   While  swallowed,  the  target  is  blinded  and  restrained,   it  has  total  cover  against  attacks  and  other  effects   outside  the  behir,  and  it  takes  21  (6d6)  acid  damage  at   the  start  of  each  of  the  behir's  turns.  A  behir  can  have   only  one  creature  swallowed  at  a  time.      If  the  behir  takes  30  damage  or  more  on  a  single  turn   from  the  swallowed  creature,  the  behir  must  succeed   on  a  DC  14  Constitution  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  that   turn  or  regurgitate  the  creature,  which  falls  prone  in  a   space  within  10  feet  of  the  behir.  If  the  behir  dies,  a   swallowed  creature  is  no  longer  restrained  by  it  and  can   escape  from  the  corpse  by  using  15  feet  of  movement,   exiting  prone.  
  
Bugbear  
Medium  humanoid  (goblinoid),  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  16  (hide  armor,  shield)  
Hit  Points  27  (5d8  +  5)  
Speed  30  ft.  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   14  (+2)   13  (+1)   8  (-1)   11  (+0)   9  (-1)  
Skills  Stealth  +6,  Survival  +2   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  Common,  Goblin   Challenge  1  (200  XP)        Brute.  A  melee  weapon  deals  one  extra  die  of  its  damage   when  the  bugbear  hits  with  it  (included  in  the  attack).   Surprise  Attack.  If  the  bugbear  surprises  a  creature  and   hits  it  with  an  attack  during  the  first  round  of  combat,   the  target  takes  an  extra  7  (2d6)  damage  from  the   attack.  
Actions  
Morningstar.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  11  (2d8  +  2)  piercing  damage.   Javelin.  Melee  or  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,   reach  5  ft.  or  range  30/120  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  9  (2d6  +   2)  piercing  damage  in  melee  or  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing   damage  at  range.     
Bulette  
Large  monstrosity,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  94  (9d10  +  45)   Speed  40  ft.,  burrow  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   11  (+0)   21  (+5)   2  (-4)   10  (+0)   5  (-3)  
Skills  Perception  +6   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  tremorsense  60  ft.,  passive  
Perception  16   Languages  --   Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)        Standing  Leap.  The  bulette's  long  jump  is  up  to  30  feet   and  its  high  jump  is  up  to  15  feet,  with  or  without  a   running  start.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  30  (4d12  +  4)  piercing  damage.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

269-]  {+5.1  

266+}  

Deadly  Leap.  If  the  bulette  jumps  at  least  15  feet  as   part  of  its  movement,  it  can  then  use  this  action  to  land   on  its  feet  in  a  space  that  contains  one  or  more  other   creatures.  Each  of  those  creatures  must  succeed  on  a   DC  16  Strength  or  Dexterity  saving  throw  (target's   choice)  or  be  knocked  prone  and  take  14  (3d6  +  4)   bludgeoning  damage  plus  14  (3d6  +  4)  slashing   damage.  On  a  successful  save,  the  creature  takes  only   half  the  damage,  isn't  knocked  prone,  and  is  pushed  5   feet  out  of  the  bulette's  space  into  an  unoccupied   space  of  the  creature's  choice.  If  no  unoccupied  space   is  within  range,  the  creature  instead  falls  prone  in  the   bulette's  space.  
  
Monsters (C)
  
Centaur  
Large  monstrosity,  neutral  good  
Armor  Class  12  
Hit  Points  45  (6d10  +  12)   Speed  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   18  (+4)   14  (+2)   14  (+2)   9  (-1)   13  (+1)   11  (+0)  
Skills  Athletics  +6,  Perception  +3,  Survival  +3   Senses  passive  Perception  13  
Languages  Elvish,  Sylvan   Challenge  2  (450  XP)       
Charge.  If  the  centaur  moves  at  least  30  feet  straight   toward  a  target  and  then  hits  it  with  a  pike  attack  on   the  same  turn,  the  target  takes  an  extra  10  (3d6)   piercing  damage.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  centaur  makes  two  attacks:  one  with   its  pike  and  one  with  its  hooves  or  two  with  its   longbow.   Pike.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  9  (1d10  +  4)  piercing  damage.  
Hooves.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Longbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  range   150/600  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  6  (1d8  +  2)  piercing   damage.  

  
Chimera  
Large  monstrosity,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  14  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  114  (12d10  +  48)   Speed  30  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   11  (+0)   19  (+4)   3  (-4)   14  (+2)   10  (+0)  
Skills  Perception  +8   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  18   Languages  understands  Draconic  but  can't  speak   Challenge  6  (2,300  XP)  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  chimera  makes  three  attacks:  one   with  its  bite,  one  with  its  horns,  and  one  with  its  claws.   When  its  fire  breath  is  available,  it  can  use  the  breath   in  place  of  its  bite  or  horns.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  piercing  damage.   Horns.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  10  (1d12  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.   Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  slashing  damage.   Fire  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  head  exhales   fire  in  a  15-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must   make  a  DC  15  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  31  (7d8)   fire  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage   on  a  successful  one.     
Chuul  
Large  aberration,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  16  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  93  (11d10  +  33)   Speed  30  ft.,  swim  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   10  (+0)   16  (+3)   5  (-3)   11  (+0)   5  (-3)  
Skills  Perception  +4   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  14   Languages  understands  Deep  Speech  but  can't  speak  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

270-]  {+5.1  

267+}  

Challenge  4  (1,100  XP)        Amphibious.  The  chuul  can  breathe  air  and  water.  
Sense  Magic.  The  chuul  senses  magic  within  120  feet   of  it  at  will.  This  trait  otherwise  works  like  the  detect   magic  spell  but  isn't  itself  magical.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  chuul  makes  two  pincer  attacks.  If  the   chuul  is  grappling  a  creature,  the  chuul  can  also  use  its   tentacles  once.  
Pincer.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.  The   target  is  grappled  (escape  DC  14)  if  it  is  a  Large  or   smaller  creature  and  the  chuul  doesn't  have  two  other   creatures  grappled.   Tentacles.  One  creature  grappled  by  the  chuul  must   succeed  on  a  DC  13  Constitution  saving  throw  or  be   poisoned  for  1  minute.  Until  this  poison  ends,  the   target  is  paralyzed.  The  target  can  repeat  the  saving   throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending  the  effect   on  itself  on  a  success.  
  
Cloaker  
Large  aberration,  chaotic  neutral  
Armor  Class  14  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  78  (12d10  +  12)   Speed  10  ft.,  fly  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   17  (+3)   15  (+2)   12  (+1)   13  (+1)   12  (+1)   14  (+2)  
Skills  Stealth  +5   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  11  
Languages  Deep  Speech,  Undercommon   Challenge  8  (3,900  XP)       
Damage  Transfer.  While  attached  to  a  creature,  the   cloaker  takes  only  half  the  damage  dealt  to  it  (rounded   down),  and  that  creature  takes  the  other  half.  
False  Appearance.  While  the  cloaker  remains   motionless  without  its  underside  exposed,  it  is   indistinguishable  from  a  dark  leather  cloak.  
Light  Sensitivity.  While  in  bright  light,  the  cloaker  has   disadvantage  on  attack  rolls  and  Wisdom  (Perception)   checks  that  rely  on  sight.  

Actions  
Multiattack.  The  cloaker  makes  two  attacks:  one  with   its  bite  and  one  with  its  tail.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  10  (2d6  +  3)  piercing  damage,  and  if  the   target  is  Large  or  smaller,  the  cloaker  attaches  to  it.  If   the  cloaker  has  advantage  against  the  target,  the   cloaker  attaches  to  the  target's  head,  and  the  target  is   blinded  and  unable  to  breathe  while  the  cloaker  is   attached.  While  attached,  the  cloaker  can  make  this   attack  only  against  the  target  and  has  advantage  on  the   attack  roll.  The  cloaker  can  detach  itself  by  spending  5   feet  of  its  movement.  A  creature,  including  the  target,   can  take  its  action  to  detach  the  cloaker  by  succeeding   on  a  DC  16  Strength  check.  
Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  7  (1d8  +  3)  slashing  damage.  
Moan.  Each  creature  within  60  feet  of  the  cloaker  that   can  hear  its  moan  and  that  isn't  an  aberration  must   succeed  on  a  DC  13  Wisdom  saving  throw  or  become   frightened  until  the  end  of  the  cloaker's  next  turn.  If  a   creature's  saving  throw  is  successful,  the  creature  is   immune  to  the  cloaker's  moan  for  the  next  24  hours  
Phantasms  (Recharges  after  a  Short  or  Long  Rest).  The   cloaker  magically  creates  three  illusory  duplicates  of   itself  if  it  isn't  in  bright  light.  The  duplicates  move  with   it  and  mimic  its  actions,  shifting  position  so  as  to  make   it  impossible  to  track  which  cloaker  is  the  real  one.  If   the  cloaker  is  ever  in  an  area  of  bright  light,  the   duplicates  disappear.      Whenever  any  creature  targets  the  cloaker  with  an   attack  or  a  harmful  spell  while  a  duplicate  remains,   that  creature  rolls  randomly  to  determine  whether  it   targets  the  cloaker  or  one  of  the  duplicates.  A  creature   is  unaffected  by  this  magical  effect  if  it  can't  see  or  if  it   relies  on  senses  other  than  sight.      A  duplicate  has  the  cloaker's  AC  and  uses  its  saving   throws.  If  an  attack  hits  a  duplicate,  or  if  a  duplicate   fails  a  saving  throw  against  an  effect  that  deals  damage,   the  duplicate  disappears.  
  
Cockatrice  
Small  monstrosity,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  11  
Hit  Points  27  (6d6  +  6)  
Speed  20  ft.,  fly  40  ft.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

271-]  {+5.1  

268+}  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      6  (-2)   12  (+1)   12  (+1)   2  (-4)   13  (+1)   5  (-3)  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  11   Languages  --   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  3  (1d4  +  1)  piercing  damage,  and  the   target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  11  Constitution  saving   throw  against  being  magically  petrified.  On  a  failed   save,  the  creature  begins  to  turn  to  stone  and  is   restrained.  It  must  repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the  end   of  its  next  turn.  On  a  success,  the  effect  ends.  On  a   failure,  the  creature  is  petrified  for  24  hours.     
Couatl  
Medium  celestial,  lawful  good  
Armor  Class  19  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  97  (13d8  +  39)   Speed  30  ft.,  fly  90  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      16  (+3)   20  (+5)   17  (+3)   18  (+4)   20  (+5)   18  (+4)  
Saving  Throws  Con  +5,  Wis  +7,  Cha  +6   Damage  Resistances  radiant   Damage  Immunities  psychic;  bludgeoning,  piercing,  
and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks   Senses  truesight  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  15   Languages  all,  telepathy  120  ft.   Challenge  4  (1,100  XP)        Innate  Spellcasting.  The  couatl's  spellcasting  ability  is   Charisma  (spell  save  DC  14).  It  can  innately  cast  the   following  spells,  requiring  only  verbal  components:   At  will:  detect  evil  and  good,  detect  magic,  detect  
thoughts   3/day  each:  bless,  create  food  and  water,  cure  wounds,  
lesser  restoration,  protection  from  poison,  sanctuary,   shield   1/day  each:  dream,  greater  restoration,  scrying   Magic  Weapons.  The  couatl's  weapon  attacks  are   magical.  

Shielded  Mind.  The  couatl  is  immune  to  scrying  and  to   any  effect  that  would  sense  its  emotions,  read  its   thoughts,  or  detect  its  location.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  8  (1d6  +  5)  piercing  damage,  and  the   target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  13  Constitution  saving   throw  or  be  poisoned  for  24  hours.  Until  this  poison   ends,  the  target  is  unconscious.  Another  creature  can   use  an  action  to  shake  the  target  awake.  
Constrict.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  Medium  or  smaller  creature.  Hit:  10  (2d6  +  3)   bludgeoning  damage,  and  the  target  is  grappled   (escape  DC  15).  Until  this  grapple  ends,  the  target  is   restrained,  and  the  couatl  can't  constrict  another   target.  
Change  Shape.  The  couatl  magically  polymorphs  into  a   humanoid  or  beast  that  has  a  challenge  rating  equal  to   or  less  than  its  own,  or  back  into  its  true  form.  It   reverts  to  its  true  form  if  it  dies.  Any  equipment  it  is   wearing  or  carrying  is  absorbed  or  borne  by  the  new   form  (the  couatl's  choice).      In  a  new  form,  the  couatl  retains  its  game  statistics   and  ability  to  speak,  but  its  AC,  movement  modes,   Strength,  Dexterity,  and  other  actions  are  replaced  by   those  of  the  new  form,  and  it  gains  any  statistics  and   capabilities  (except  class  features,  legendary  actions,   and  lair  actions)  that  the  new  form  has  but  that  it  lacks.   If  the  new  form  has  a  bite  attack,  the  couatl  can  use  its   bite  in  that  form.  
  
Monsters (D)
  
Darkmantle  
Small  monstrosity,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  11  
Hit  Points  22  (5d6  +  5)  
Speed  10  ft.,  fly  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   16  (+3)   12  (+1)   13  (+1)   2  (-4)   10  (+0)   5  (-3)  
Skills  Stealth  +3  
Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10  
Languages  --  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

272-]  {+5.1  

269+}  

Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)  
    
Echolocation.  The  darkmantle  can't  use  its  blindsight   while  deafened.  
False  Appearance.  While  the  darkmantle  remains   motionless,  it  is  indistinguishable  from  a  cave   formation  such  as  a  stalactite  or  stalagmite.  
Actions  
Crush.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  6  (1d6  +  3)  bludgeoning  damage,  and  the   darkmantle  attaches  to  the  target.  If  the  target  is   Medium  or  smaller  and  the  darkmantle  has  advantage   on  the  attack  roll,  it  attaches  by  engulfing  the  target's   head,  and  the  target  is  also  blinded  and  unable  to   breathe  while  the  darkmantle  is  attached  in  this  way.      While  attached  to  the  target,  the  darkmantle  can   attack  no  other  creature  except  the  target  but  has   advantage  on  its  attack  rolls.  The  darkmantle's  speed   also  becomes  0,  it  can't  benefit  from  any  bonus  to  its   speed,  and  it  moves  with  the  target.      A  creature  can  detach  the  darkmantle  by  making  a   successful  DC  13  Strength  check  as  an  action.  On  its   turn,  the  darkmantle  can  detach  itself  from  the  target   by  using  5  feet  of  movement.  
Darkness  Aura  (1/Day).  A  15-foot  radius  of  magical   darkness  extends  out  from  the  darkmantle,  moves  with   it,  and  spreads  around  corners.  The  darkness  lasts  as   long  as  the  darkmantle  maintains  concentration,  up  to   10  minutes  (as  if  concentrating  on  a  spell).  Darkvision   can't  penetrate  this  darkness,  and  no  natural  light  can   illuminate  it.  If  any  of  the  darkness  overlaps  with  an   area  of  light  created  by  a  spell  of  2nd  level  or  lower,   the  spell  creating  the  light  is  dispelled.  
  
Demons
Balor  
Huge  fiend  (demon),  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  19  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  262  (21d12  +  126)  
Speed  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   26  (+8)   15  (+2)   22  (+6)   20  (+5)   16  (+3)   22  (+6)  
Saving  Throws  Str  +14,  Con  +12,  Wis  +9,  Cha  +12  
Damage  Resistances  cold,  lightning;  bludgeoning,   piercing,  and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  

Damage  Immunities  fire,  poison  
Condition  Immunities  poisoned  
Senses  truesight  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  13  
Languages  Abyssal,  telepathy  120  ft.  
Challenge  19  (22,000  XP)  
  
Death  Throes.  When  the  balor  dies,  it  explodes,  and   each  creature  within  30  feet  of  it  must  make  a  DC  20   Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  70  (20d6)  fire  damage   on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on  a   successful  one.  The  explosion  ignites  flammable   objects  in  that  area  that  aren't  being  worn  or  carried,   and  it  destroys  the  balor's  weapons.  
Fire  Aura.  At  the  start  of  each  of  the  balor's  turns,  each   creature  within  5  feet  of  it  takes  10  (3d6)  fire  damage,   and  flammable  objects  in  the  aura  that  aren't  being   worn  or  carried  ignite.  A  creature  that  touches  the   balor  or  hits  it  with  a  melee  attack  while  within  5  feet   of  it  takes  10  (3d6)  fire  damage.  
Magic  Resistance.  The  balor  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Magic  Weapons.  The  balor's  weapon  attacks  are   magical.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  balor  makes  two  attacks:  one  with  its   longsword  and  one  with  its  whip.  
Longsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +14  to  hit,  reach  10   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  21  (3d8  +  8)  slashing  damage  plus   13  (3d8)  lightning  damage.  If  the  balor  scores  a  critical   hit,  it  rolls  damage  dice  three  times,  instead  of  twice.  
Whip.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +14  to  hit,  reach  30  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  15  (2d6  +  8)  slashing  damage  plus  10   (3d6)  fire  damage,  and  the  target  must  succeed  on  a   DC  20  Strength  saving  throw  or  be  pulled  up  to  25  feet   toward  the  balor.  
Teleport.  The  balor  magically  teleports,  along  with  any   equipment  it  is  wearing  or  carrying,  up  to  120  feet  to   an  unoccupied  space  it  can  see.  
  
Dretch  
Small  fiend  (demon),  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  11  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  18  (4d6  +  4)  
Speed  20  ft.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

273-]  {+5.1  

270+}  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      11  (+0)   11  (+0)   12  (+1)   5  (-3)   8  (-1)   3  (-4)  
Damage  Resistances  cold,  fire,  lightning   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  9   Languages  Abyssal,  telepathy  60  ft.  (works  only  with  
creatures  that  understand  Abyssal)   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dretch  makes  two  attacks:  one  with   its  bite  and  one  with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  3  (1d6)  piercing  damage.   Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  5  (2d4)  slashing  damage.   Fetid  Cloud  (1/Day).  A  10-foot  radius  of  disgusting   green  gas  extends  out  from  the  dretch.  The  gas  spreads   around  corners,  and  its  area  is  lightly  obscured.  It  lasts   for  1  minute  or  until  a  strong  wind  disperses  it.  Any   creature  that  starts  its  turn  in  that  area  must  succeed   on  a  DC  11  Constitution  saving  throw  or  be  poisoned   until  the  start  of  its  next  turn.  While  poisoned  in  this   way,  the  target  can  take  either  an  action  or  a  bonus   action  on  its  turn,  not  both,  and  can't  take  reactions.     
Glabrezu  
Large  fiend  (demon),  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  157  (15d10  +  75)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      20  (+5)   15  (+2)   21  (+5)   19  (+4)   17  (+3)   16  (+3)  
Saving  Throws  Str  +9,  Con  +9,  Wis  +7,  Cha  +7   Damage  Resistances  cold,  fire,  lightning;  bludgeoning,  
piercing,  and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned   Senses  truesight  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  13   Languages  Abyssal,  telepathy  120  ft.   Challenge  9  (5,000  XP)       

Innate  Spellcasting.  The  glabrezu's  spellcasting  ability   is  Intelligence  (spell  save  DC  16).  The  glabrezu  can   innately  cast  the  following  spells,  requiring  no  material   components:   At  will:  darkness,  detect  magic,  dispel  magic  
1/day  each:  confusion,  fly,  power  word  stun   Magic  Resistance.  The  glabrezu  has  advantage  on   saving  throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  glabrezu  makes  four  attacks:  two  with   its  pincers  and  two  with  its  fists.  Alternatively,  it  makes   two  attacks  with  its  pincers  and  casts  one  spell.  
Pincer.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  16  (2d10  +  5)  bludgeoning  damage.  If   the  target  is  a  Medium  or  smaller  creature,  it  is   grappled  (escape  DC  15).  The  glabrezu  has  two  pincers,   each  of  which  can  grapple  only  one  target.  
Fist.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (2d4  +  2)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Hezrou  
Large  fiend  (demon),  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  16  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  136  (13d10  +  65)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   17  (+3)   20  (+5)   5  (-3)   12  (+1)   13  (+1)  
Saving  Throws  Str  +7,  Con  +8,  Wis  +4   Damage  Resistances  cold,  fire,  lightning;  bludgeoning,  
piercing,  and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  
Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  11  
Languages  Abyssal,  telepathy  120  ft.   Challenge  8  (3,900  XP)  
     Magic  Resistance.  The  hezrou  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Stench.  Any  creature  that  starts  its  turn  within  10  feet   of  the  hezrou  must  succeed  on  a  DC  14  Constitution   saving  throw  or  be  poisoned  until  the  start  of  its  next   turn.  On  a  successful  saving  throw,  the  creature  is   immune  to  the  hezrou's  stench  for  24  hours.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

274-]  {+5.1  

271+}  

Actions  
Multiattack.  The  hezrou  makes  three  attacks:  one  with   its  bite  and  two  with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  15  (2d10  +  4)  piercing  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  slashing  damage.     
Marilith  
Large  fiend  (demon),  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  18  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  189  (18d10  +  90)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   20  (+5)   20  (+5)   18  (+4)   16  (+3)   20  (+5)  
Saving  Throws  Str  +9,  Con  +10,  Wis  +8,  Cha  +10   Damage  Resistances  cold,  fire,  lightning;  bludgeoning,  
piercing,  and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned   Senses  truesight  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  13   Languages  Abyssal,  telepathy  120  ft.   Challenge  16  (15,000  XP)      Magic  Resistance.  The  marilith  has  advantage  on   saving  throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.   Magic  Weapons.  The  marilith's  weapon  attacks  are   magical.   Reactive.  The  marilith  can  take  one  reaction  on  every   turn  in  a  combat.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  marilith  makes  seven  attacks:  six  with   its  longswords  and  one  with  its  tail.   Longsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  13  (2d8  +  4)  slashing  damage.   Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  15  (2d10  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.  If  the   target  is  Medium  or  smaller,  it  is  grappled  (escape  DC   19).  Until  this  grapple  ends,  the  target  is  restrained,  the   marilith  can  automatically  hit  the  target  with  its  tail,   and  the  marilith  can't  make  tail  attacks  against  other   targets.  

Teleport.  The  marilith  magically  teleports,  along  with   any  equipment  it  is  wearing  or  carrying,  up  to  120  feet   to  an  unoccupied  space  it  can  see.  
Reactions  
Parry.  The  marilith  adds  5  to  its  AC  against  one  melee   attack  that  would  hit  it.  To  do  so,  the  marilith  must  see   the  attacker  and  be  wielding  a  melee  weapon.     
Nalfeshnee  
Large  fiend  (demon),  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  18  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  184  (16d10  +  96)   Speed  20  ft.,  fly  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      21  (+5)   10  (+0)   22  (+6)   19  (+4)   12  (+1)   15  (+2)  
Saving  Throws  Con  +11,  Int  +9,  Wis  +6,  Cha  +7   Damage  Resistances  cold,  fire,  lightning;  bludgeoning,  
piercing,  and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned   Senses  truesight  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  11   Languages  Abyssal,  telepathy  120  ft.   Challenge  13  (10,000  XP)      Magic  Resistance.  The  nalfeshnee  has  advantage  on   saving  throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  nalfeshnee  uses  Horror  Nimbus  if  it   can.  It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and   two  with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  32  (5d10  +  5)  piercing  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  15  (3d6  +  5)  slashing  damage.   Horror  Nimbus  (Recharge  5­6).  The  nalfeshnee   magically  emits  scintillating,  multicolored  light.  Each   creature  within  15  feet  of  the  nalfeshnee  that  can  see   the  light  must  succeed  on  a  DC  15  Wisdom  saving   throw  or  be  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can   repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,   ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's   saving  throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

275-]  {+5.1  

272+}  

creature  is  immune  to  the  nalfeshnee's  Horror  Nimbus   for  the  next  24  hours.  
Teleport.  The  nalfeshnee  magically  teleports,  along   with  any  equipment  it  is  wearing  or  carrying,  up  to  120   feet  to  an  unoccupied  space  it  can  see.  
  
Quasit  
Tiny  fiend  (demon,  shapechanger),  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  13  
Hit  Points  7  (3d4)  
Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   5  (-3)   17  (+3)   10  (+0)   7  (-2)   10  (+0)   10  (+0)  
Skills  Stealth  +5  
Damage  Resistances  cold,  fire,  lightning;  bludgeoning,   piercing,  and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  
Damage  Immunities  poison  
Condition  Immunities  poisoned  
Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  10  
Languages  Abyssal,  Common  
Challenge  1  (200  XP)  
    
Shapechanger.  The  quasit  can  use  its  action  to   polymorph  into  a  beast  form  that  resembles  a  bat   (speed  10  ft.  fly  40  ft.),  a  centipede  (40  ft.,  climb  40  ft.),   or  a  toad  (40  ft.,  swim  40  ft.),  or  back  into  its  true  form.   Its  statistics  are  the  same  in  each  form,  except  for  the   speed  changes  noted.  Any  equipment  it  is  wearing  or   carrying  isn't  transformed.  It  reverts  to  its  true  form  if   it  dies.  
Magic  Resistance.  The  quasit  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Actions  
Claws  (Bite  in  Beast  Form).  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4   to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d4  +  3)  piercing   damage,  and  the  target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  10   Constitution  saving  throw  or  take  5  (2d4)  poison   damage  and  become  poisoned  for  1  minute.  The  target   can  repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its   turns,  ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  
Scare  (1/Day).  One  creature  of  the  quasit's  choice   within  20  feet  of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  10  Wisdom   saving  throw  or  be  frightened  for  1  minute.  The  target   can  repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  

turns,  with  disadvantage  if  the  quasit  is  within  line  of   sight,  ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  
Invisibility.  The  quasit  magically  turns  invisible  until  it   attacks  or  uses  Scare,  or  until  its  concentration  ends  (as   if  concentrating  on  a  spell).  Any  equipment  the  quasit   wears  or  carries  is  invisible  with  it.  
  
Vrock  
Large  fiend  (demon),  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  15  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  104  (11d10  +  44)  
Speed  40  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      17  (+3)   15  (+2)   18  (+4)   8  (-1)   13  (+1)   8  (-1)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +5,  Wis  +4,  Cha  +2   Damage  Resistances  cold,  fire,  lightning;  bludgeoning,  
piercing,  and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  
Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned  
Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  11   Languages  Abyssal,  telepathy  120  ft.   Challenge  6  (2,300  XP)  
     Magic  Resistance.  The  vrock  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  vrock  makes  two  attacks:  one  with  its   beak  and  one  with  its  talons.   Beak.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  10  (2d6  +  3)  piercing  damage.  
Talons.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  14  (2d10  +  3)  slashing  damage.  
Spores  (Recharge  6).  A  15-foot-radius  cloud  of  toxic   spores  extends  out  from  the  vrock.  The  spores  spread   around  corners.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must   succeed  on  a  DC  14  Constitution  saving  throw  or   become  poisoned.  While  poisoned  in  this  way,  a  target   takes  5  (1d10)  poison  damage  at  the  start  of  each  of  its   turns.  A  target  can  repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the  end   of  each  of  its  turns,  ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a   success.  Emptying  a  vial  of  holy  water  on  the  target   also  ends  the  effect  on  it.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

276-]  {+5.1  

273+}  

Stunning  Screech  (1/Day).  The  vrock  emits  a  horrific   screech.  Each  creature  within  20  feet  of  it  that  can  hear   it  and  that  isn't  a  demon  must  succeed  on  a  DC  14   Constitution  saving  throw  or  be  stunned  until  the  end   of  the  vrock's  next  turn.     
Devils
Barbed  Devil  
Medium  fiend  (devil),  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  15  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  110  (13d8  +  52)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      16  (+3)   17  (+3)   18  (+4)   12  (+1)   14  (+2)   14  (+2)  
Saving  Throws  Str  +6,  Con  +7,  Wis  +5,  Cha  +5   Skills  Deception  +5,  Insight  +5,  Perception  +8   Damage  Resistances  cold;  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and  
slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  that  aren't  silvered   Damage  Immunities  fire,  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  18   Languages  Infernal,  telepathy  120  ft.   Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)        Barbed  Hide.  At  the  start  of  each  of  its  turns,  the   barbed  devil  deals  5  (1d10)  piercing  damage  to  any   creature  grappling  it.   Devil's  Sight.  Magical  darkness  doesn't  impede  the   devil's  darkvision.   Magic  Resistance.  The  devil  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  devil  makes  three  melee  attacks:  one   with  its  tail  and  two  with  its  claws.  Alternatively,  it  can   use  Hurl  Flame  twice.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  6  (1d6  +  3)  piercing  damage.   Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  10  (2d6  +  3)  piercing  damage.   Hurl  Flame.  Ranged  Spell  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  range  150   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  10  (3d6)  fire  damage.  If  the  target  is  

a  flammable  object  that  isn't  being  worn  or  carried,  it   also  catches  fire.  
  
Bearded  Devil  
Medium  fiend  (devil),  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  52  (8d8  +  16)  
Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   16  (+3)   15  (+2)   15  (+2)   9  (-1)   11  (+0)   11  (+0)  
Saving  Throws  Str  +5,  Con  +4,  Wis  +2  
Damage  Resistances  cold;  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and   slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  that  aren't  silvered  
Damage  Immunities  fire,  poison  
Condition  Immunities  poisoned  
Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  10  
Languages  Infernal,  telepathy  120  ft.  
Challenge  3  (700  XP)  
    
Devil's  Sight.  Magical  darkness  doesn't  impede  the   devil's  darkvision.  
Magic  Resistance.  The  devil  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Steadfast.  The  devil  can't  be  frightened  while  it  can  see   an  allied  creature  within  30  feet  of  it.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  devil  makes  two  attacks:  one  with  its   beard  and  one  with  its  glaive.  
Beard.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  6  (1d8  +  2)  piercing  damage,  and  the   target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  12  Constitution  saving   throw  or  be  poisoned  for  1  minute.  While  poisoned  in   this  way,  the  target  can't  regain  hit  points.  The  target   can  repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its   turns,  ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  
Glaive.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  8  (1d10  +  3)  slashing  damage.  If  the   target  is  a  creature  other  than  an  undead  or  a   construct,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  12  Constitution   saving  throw  or  lose  5  (1d10)  hit  points  at  the  start  of   each  of  its  turns  due  to  an  infernal  wound.  Each  time   the  devil  hits  the  wounded  target  with  this  attack,  the   damage  dealt  by  the  wound  increases  by  5  (1d10).  Any   creature  can  take  an  action  to  stanch  the  wound  with  a  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

277-]  {+5.1  

274+}  

successful  DC  12  Wisdom  (Medicine)  check.  The  wound   also  closes  if  the  target  receives  magical  healing.     
Bone  Devil  
Large  fiend  (devil),  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  19  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  142  (15d10  +  60)   Speed  40  ft.,  fly  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   16  (+3)   18  (+4)   13  (+1)   14  (+2)   16  (+3)  
Saving  Throws  Int  +5,  Wis  +6,  Cha  +7   Skills  Deception  +7,  Insight  +6   Damage  Resistances  cold;  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and  
slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  that  aren't  silvered   Damage  Immunities  fire,  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  12   Languages  Infernal,  telepathy  120  ft.   Challenge  9  (5,000  XP)        Devil's  Sight.  Magical  darkness  doesn't  impede  the   devil's  darkvision.   Magic  Resistance.  The  devil  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  devil  makes  three  attacks:  two  with   its  claws  and  one  with  its  sting.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  8  (1d8  +  4)  slashing  damage.   Sting.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  13  (2d8  +  4)  piercing  damage  plus  17   (5d6)  poison  damage,  and  the  target  must  succeed  on   a  DC  14  Constitution  saving  throw  or  become  poisoned   for  1  minute.  The  target  can  repeat  the  saving  throw  at   the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending  the  effect  on  itself   on  a  success.     
Chain  Devil  
Medium  fiend  (devil),  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  16  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  85  (10d8  +  40)   Speed  30  ft.  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   18  (+4)   15  (+2)   18  (+4)   11  (+0)   12  (+1)   14  (+2)  
Saving  Throws  Con  +7,  Wis  +4,  Cha  +5  
Damage  Resistances  cold;  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and   slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  that  aren't  silvered  
Damage  Immunities  fire,  poison  
Condition  Immunities  poisoned  
Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  11  
Languages  Infernal,  telepathy  120  ft.  
Challenge  8  (3,900  XP)  
    
Devil's  Sight.  Magical  darkness  doesn't  impede  the   devil's  darkvision.  
Magic  Resistance.  The  devil  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  devil  makes  two  attacks  with  its   chains.  
Chain.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  slashing  damage.  The   target  is  grappled  (escape  DC  14)  if  the  devil  isn't   already  grappling  a  creature.  Until  this  grapple  ends,   the  target  is  restrained  and  takes  7  (2d6)  piercing   damage  at  the  start  of  each  of  its  turns.  
Animate  Chains  (Recharges  after  a  Short  or  Long  Rest).   Up  to  four  chains  the  devil  can  see  within  60  feet  of  it   magically  sprout  razor-edged  barbs  and  animate  under   the  devil's  control,  provided  that  the  chains  aren't   being  worn  or  carried.      Each  animated  chain  is  an  object  with  AC  20,  20  hit   points,  resistance  to  piercing  damage,  and  immunity  to   psychic  and  thunder  damage.  When  the  devil  uses   Multiattack  on  its  turn,  it  can  use  each  animated  chain   to  make  one  additional  chain  attack.  An  animated   chain  can  grapple  one  creature  of  its  own  but  can't   make  attacks  while  grappling.  An  animated  chain   reverts  to  its  inanimate  state  if  reduced  to  0  hit  points   or  if  the  devil  is  incapacitated  or  dies.  
Reactions  
Unnerving  Mask.  When  a  creature  the  devil  can  see   starts  its  turn  within  30  feet  of  the  devil,  the  devil  can   create  the  illusion  that  it  looks  like  one  of  the   creature's  departed  loved  ones  or  bitter  enemies.  If  the   creature  can  see  the  devil,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  14  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

278-]  {+5.1  

275+}  

Wisdom  saving  throw  or  be  frightened  until  the  end  of   its  turn.     
Erinyes  
Medium  fiend  (devil),  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  18  (plate)   Hit  Points  153  (18d8  +  72)   Speed  30  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   16  (+3)   18  (+4)   14  (+2)   14  (+2)   18  (+4)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +7,  Con  +8,  Wis  +6,  Cha  +8   Damage  Resistances  cold;  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and  
slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  that  aren't  silvered   Damage  Immunities  fire,  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned   Senses  truesight  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  12   Languages  Infernal,  telepathy  120  ft.   Challenge  12  (8,400  XP)        Hellish  Weapons.  The  erinyes's  weapon  attacks  are   magical  and  deal  an  extra  13  (3d8)  poison  damage  on  a   hit  (included  in  the  attacks).   Magic  Resistance.  The  erinyes  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  erinyes  makes  three  attacks.   Longsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  8  (1d8  +  4)  slashing  damage,  or  9  (1d10   +  4)  slashing  damage  if  used  with  two  hands,  plus  13   (3d8)  poison  damage.   Longbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  range   150/600  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  7  (1d8  +  3)  piercing   damage  plus  13  (3d8)  poison  damage,  and  the  target   must  succeed  on  a  DC  14  Constitution  saving  throw  or   be  poisoned.  The  poison  lasts  until  it  is  removed  by  the   lesser  restoration  spell  or  similar  magic.  
Reactions  
Parry.  The  erinyes  adds  4  to  its  AC  against  one  melee   attack  that  would  hit  it.  To  do  so,  the  erinyes  must  see   the  attacker  and  be  wielding  a  melee  weapon.     

Horned  Devil  
Large  fiend  (devil),  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  18  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  [-148-]  {+178+}  (17d10  +  [-55)-]  {+85)+}  
Speed  20  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   22  (+6)   17  (+3)   21  (+5)   12  (+1)   16  (+3)   17  (+3)  
Saving  Throws  Str  +10,  Dex  +7,  Wis  +7,  Cha  +7  
Damage  Resistances  cold;  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and   slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  not  made  with   silvered  weapons  
Damage  Immunities  fire,  poison  
Condition  Immunities  poisoned  
Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  13  
Languages  Infernal,  telepathy  120  ft.  
Challenge  11  (7,200  XP)  
  
Devil's  Sight.  Magical  darkness  doesn't  impede  the   devil's  darkvision.  
Magic  Resistance.  The  devil  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  devil  makes  three  melee  attacks:  two   with  its  fork  and  one  with  its  tail.  It  can  use  Hurl  Flame   in  place  of  any  melee  attack.  
Fork.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  15  (2d8  +  6)  piercing  damage.  
Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  10  (1d8  +  6)  piercing  damage.  If  the  target  is   a  creature  other  than  an  undead  or  a  construct,  it  must   succeed  on  a  DC  17  Constitution  saving  throw  or  lose   10  (3d6)  hit  points  at  the  start  of  each  of  its  turns  due   to  an  infernal  wound.  Each  time  the  devil  hits  the   wounded  target  with  this  attack,  the  damage  dealt  by   the  wound  increases  by  10  (3d6).  Any  creature  can  take   an  action  to  stanch  the  wound  with  a  successful  DC  12   Wisdom  (Medicine)  check.  The  wound  also  closes  if  the   target  receives  magical  healing.  
Hurl  Flame.  Ranged  Spell  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  range  150   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  14  (4d6)  fire  damage.  If  the  target  is   a  flammable  object  that  isn't  being  worn  or  carried,  it   also  catches  fire.  
  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

279-]  {+5.1  

276+}  

Ice  Devil  
Large  fiend  (devil),  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  18  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  180  (19d10  +  76)  
Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      21  (+5)   14  (+2)   18  (+4)   18  (+4)   15  (+2)   18  (+4)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +7,  Con  +9,  Wis  +7,  Cha  +9   Damage  Resistances  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and  
slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  that  aren't  silvered  
Damage  Immunities  cold,  fire,  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned  
Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive   Perception  12  
Languages  Infernal,  telepathy  120  ft.   Challenge  14  (11,500  XP)  
   Devil's  Sight.  Magical  darkness  doesn't  impede  the   devil's  darkvision.  
Magic  Resistance.  The  devil  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  devil  makes  three  attacks:  one  with   its  bite,  one  with  its  claws,  and  one  with  its  tail.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  12  (2d6  +  5)  piercing  damage  plus  10  (3d6)   cold  damage.  
Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  10  (2d4  +  5)  slashing  damage  plus  10   (3d6)  cold  damage.  
Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  12  (2d6  +  5)  bludgeoning  damage  plus  10   (3d6)  cold  damage.  
Wall  of  Ice  (Recharge  6).  The  devil  magically  forms  an   opaque  wall  of  ice  on  a  solid  surface  it  can  see  within   60  feet  of  it.  The  wall  is  1  foot  thick  and  up  to  30  feet   long  and  10  feet  high,  or  it's  a  hemispherical  dome  up   to  20  feet  in  diameter.      When  the  wall  appears,  each  creature  in  its  space  is   pushed  out  of  it  by  the  shortest  route.  The  creature   chooses  which  side  of  the  wall  to  end  up  on,  unless  the   creature  is  incapacitated.  The  creature  then  makes  a   DC  17  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  35  (10d6)  cold   damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on  a  

successful  one.      The  wall  lasts  for  1  minute  or  until  the  devil  is   incapacitated  or  dies.  The  wall  can  be  damaged  and   breached;  each  10-foot  section  has  AC  5,  30  hit  points,   vulnerability  to  fire  damage,  and  immunity  to  acid,  cold,   necrotic,  poison,  and  psychic  damage.  If  a  section  is   destroyed,  it  leaves  behind  a  sheet  of  frigid  air  in  the   space  the  wall  occupied.  Whenever  a  creature  finishes   moving  through  the  frigid  air  on  a  turn,  willingly  or   otherwise,  the  creature  must  make  a  DC  17   Constitution  saving  throw,  taking  17  (5d6)  cold  damage   on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on  a   successful  one.  The  frigid  air  dissipates  when  the  rest   of  the  wall  vanishes.  
  
Imp  
Tiny  fiend  (devil,  shapechanger),  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  13  
Hit  Points  10  (3d4  +  3)  
Speed  20  ft.,  fly  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   6  (-2)   17  (+3)   13  (+1)   11  (+0)   12  (+1)   14  (+2)  
Skills  Deception  +4,  Insight  +3,  Persuasion  +4,  Stealth   +5  
Damage  Resistances  cold;  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and   slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  that  aren't  silvered  
Damage  Immunities  fire,  poison  
Condition  Immunities  poisoned  
Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  11  
Languages  Infernal,  Common  
Challenge  1  (200  XP)  
    
Shapechanger.  The  imp  can  use  its  action  to   polymorph  into  a  beast  form  that  resembles  a  rat   (speed  20  ft.),  a  raven  (20  ft.,  fly  60  ft.),  or  a  spider  (20   ft.,  climb  20  ft.),  or  back  into  its  true  form.  Its  statistics   are  the  same  in  each  form,  except  for  the  speed   changes  noted.  Any  equipment  it  is  wearing  or  carrying   isn't  transformed.  It  reverts  to  its  true  form  if  it  dies.  
Devil's  Sight.  Magical  darkness  doesn't  impede  the   imp's  darkvision.  
Magic  Resistance.  The  imp  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

280-]  {+5.1  

277+}  

Actions  
Sting  (Bite  in  Beast  Form).  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5   to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d4  +  3)  piercing   damage,  and  the  target  must  make  on  a  DC  11   Constitution  saving  throw,  taking  10  (3d6)  poison   damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on  a   successful  one.   Invisibility.  The  imp  magically  turns  invisible  until  it   attacks  or  until  its  concentration  ends  (as  if   concentrating  on  a  spell).  Any  equipment  the  imp   wears  or  carries  is  invisible  with  it.     
Lemure  
Medium  fiend  (devil),  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  7   Hit  Points  13  (3d8)   Speed  15  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      10  (+0)   5  (-3)   11  (+0)   1  (-5)   11  (+0)   3  (-4)  
Damage  Resistances  cold   Damage  Immunities  fire,  poison   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  frightened,  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  understands  Infernal  but  can't  speak   Challenge  0  (10  XP)      Devil's  Sight.  Magical  darkness  doesn't  impede  the   lemure's  darkvision.   Hellish  Rejuvenation.  A  lemure  that  dies  in  the  Nine   Hells  comes  back  to  life  with  all  its  hit  points  in  1d10   days  unless  it  is  killed  by  a  good-aligned  creature  with  a   bless  spell  cast  on  that  creature  or  its  remains  are   sprinkled  with  holy  water.  
Actions  
Fist.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  2  (1d4)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Pit  Fiend  
Large  fiend  (devil),  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  19  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  300  (24d10  +  168)   Speed  30  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   26  (+8)   14  (+2)   24  (+7)   22  (+6)   18  (+4)   24  (+7)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +8,  Con  +13,  Wis  +10  
Damage  Resistances  cold;  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and   slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  that  aren't  silvered  
Damage  Immunities  fire,  poison  
Condition  Immunities  poisoned  
Senses  truesight  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  14  
Languages  Infernal,  telepathy  120  ft.  
Challenge  20  (25,000  XP)  
    
Fear  Aura.  Any  creature  hostile  to  the  pit  fiend  that   starts  its  turn  within  20  feet  of  the  pit  fiend  must  make   a  DC  21  Wisdom  saving  throw,  unless  the  pit  fiend  is   incapacitated.  On  a  failed  save,  the  creature  is   frightened  until  the  start  of  its  next  turn.  If  a  creature's   saving  throw  is  successful,  the  creature  is  immune  to   the  pit  fiend's  Fear  Aura  for  the  next  24  hours.  
Magic  Resistance.  The  pit  fiend  has  advantage  on   saving  throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Magic  Weapons.  The  pit  fiend's  weapon  attacks  are   magical.  
Innate  Spellcasting.  The  pit  fiend's  spellcasting  ability   is  Charisma  (spell  save  DC  21).  The  pit  fiend  can   innately  cast  the  following  spells,  requiring  no  material   components:  
At  will:  detect  magic,  fireball  
3/day  each:  hold  monster,  wall  of  fire  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  pit  fiend  makes  four  attacks:  one  with   its  bite,  one  with  its  claw,  one  with  its  mace,  and  one   with  its  tail.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +14  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  22  (4d6  +  8)  piercing  damage.  The  target   must  succeed  on  a  DC  21  Constitution  saving  throw  or   become  poisoned.  While  poisoned  in  this  way,  the   target  can't  regain  hit  points,  and  it  takes  21  (6d6)   poison  damage  at  the  start  of  each  of  its  turns.  The   poisoned  target  can  repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the  end   of  each  of  its  turns,  ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a   success.  
Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +14  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  17  (2d8  +  8)  slashing  damage.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

281-]  {+5.1  

278+}  

Mace.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +14  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  15  (2d6  +  8)  bludgeoning  damage  plus   21  (6d6)  fire  damage.   Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +14  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  24  (3d10  +  8)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Dinosaurs
Plesiosaurus  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  68  (8d10  +  24)   Speed  20  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   15  (+2)   16  (+3)   2  (-4)   12  (+1)   5  (-3)  
Skills  Perception  +3,  Stealth  +4   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  2  (450  XP)        Hold  Breath.  The  plesiosaurus  can  hold  its  breath  for  1   hour.  
Actions   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  14  (3d6  +  4)  piercing  damage.     
Triceratops  
Huge  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  95  (10d12  +  30)   Speed  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      22  (+6)   9  (-1)   17  (+3)   2  (-4)   11  (+0)   5  (-3)  
Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)        Trampling  Charge.  If  the  triceratops  moves  at  least  20   feet  straight  toward  a  creature  and  then  hits  it  with  a   gore  attack  on  the  same  turn,  that  target  must  succeed   on  a  DC  13  Strength  saving  throw  or  be  knocked  prone.  

If  the  target  is  prone,  the  triceratops  can  make  one   stomp  attack  against  it  as  a  bonus  action.  
Actions  
Gore.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  24  (4d8  +  6)  piercing  damage.   Stomp.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  prone  creature.  Hit:  22  (3d10  +  6)  bludgeoning   damage.     
Tyrannosaurus  Rex  
Huge  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  136  (13d12  +  52)   Speed  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      25  (+7)   10  (+0)   19  (+4)   2  (-4)   12  (+1)   9  (-1)  
Skills  Perception  +4   Senses  passive  Perception  14   Languages  --   Challenge  8  (3,900  XP)  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  tyrannosaurus  makes  two  attacks:   one  with  its  bite  and  one  with  its  tail.  It  can't  make   both  attacks  against  the  same  target.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  33  (4d12  +  7)  piercing  damage.  If  the   target  is  a  Medium  or  smaller  creature,  it  is  grappled   (escape  DC  17).  Until  this  grapple  ends,  the  target  is   restrained,  and  the  tyrannosaurus  can't  bite  another   target.   Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  20  (3d8  +  7)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Doppelganger  
Medium  monstrosity  (shapechanger),  neutral  
Armor  Class  14   Hit  Points  52  (8d8  +  16)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      11  (+0)   18  (+4)   14  (+2)   11  (+0)   12  (+1)   14  (+2)  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

282-]  {+5.1  

279+}  

Skills  Deception  +6,  Insight  +3  
Condition  Immunities  charmed  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  11  
Languages  Common  
Challenge  3  (700  XP)  
    
Shapechanger.  The  doppelganger  can  use  its  action  to   polymorph  into  a  Small  or  Medium  humanoid  it  has   seen,  or  back  into  its  true  form.  Its  statistics,  other  than   its  size,  are  the  same  in  each  form.  Any  equipment  it  is   wearing  or  carrying  isn't  transformed.  It  reverts  to  its   true  form  if  it  dies.  
Ambusher.  [-The-]  {+In  the  first  round  of  a  combat,  the+}   doppelganger  has  advantage  on  attack  rolls  against  any   creature  it  has  surprised.  
Surprise  Attack.  If  the  doppelganger  surprises  a   creature  and  hits  it  with  an  attack  during  the  first   round  of  combat,  the  target  takes  an  extra  10  (3d6)   damage  from  the  attack.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  doppelganger  makes  two  melee   attacks.  
Slam.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (1d6  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Read  Thoughts.  The  doppelganger  magically  reads  the   surface  thoughts  of  one  creature  within  60  feet  of  it.   The  effect  can  penetrate  barriers,  but  3  feet  of  wood  or   dirt,  2  feet  of  stone,  2  inches  of  metal,  or  a  thin  sheet   of  lead  blocks  it.  While  the  target  is  in  range,  the   doppelganger  can  continue  reading  its  thoughts,  as   long  as  the  doppelganger's  concentration  isn't  broken   (as  if  concentrating  on  a  spell).  While  reading  the   target's  mind,  the  doppelganger  has  advantage  on   Wisdom  (Insight)  and  Charisma  (Deception,   Intimidation,  and  Persuasion)  checks  against  the  target.  
  
Dragons, Chromatic
Black Dragon
  
Ancient  Black  Dragon  
Gargantuan  dragon,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  22  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  367  (21d20  +  147)  
Speed  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   27  (+8)   14  (+2)   25  (+7)   16  (+3)   15  (+2)   19  (+4)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +9,  Con  +14,  Wis  +9,  Cha  +11  
Skills  Perception  +16,  Stealth  +9  
Damage  Immunities  acid  
Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive   Perception  26  
Languages  Common,  Draconic  
Challenge  21  (33,000  XP)  
  
Amphibious.  The  dragon  can  breathe  air  and  water.  
Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  dragon  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  can  use  its  Frightful  Presence.   It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  two   with  its  claws.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +15  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  19  (2d10  +  8)  piercing  damage  plus  9   (2d8)  acid  damage.  
Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +15  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  15  (2d6  +  8)  slashing  damage.  
Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +15  to  hit,  reach  20  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  17  (2d8  +  8)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  dragon's   choice  that  is  within  120  feet  of  the  dragon  and  aware   of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  19  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   become  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's  saving   throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  dragon's  Frightful  Presence   for  the  next  24  hours.  
Acid  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  exhales  acid  in   a  90-foot  line  that  is  10  feet  wide.  Each  creature  in  that   line  must  make  a  DC  22  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking   67  (15d8)  acid  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  dragon  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  dragon  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

283-]  {+5.1  

280+}  

Detect.  The  dragon  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)   check.  
Tail  Attack.  The  dragon  makes  a  tail  attack.   Wing  Attack  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  dragon  beats  its  
wings.  Each  creature  within  15  feet  of  the  dragon   must  succeed  on  a  DC  23  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  15  (2d6  +  8)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be   knocked  prone.  The  dragon  can  then  fly  up  to  half  its   flying  speed.     
Adult  Black  Dragon  
Huge  dragon,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  19  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  195  (17d12  +  85)   Speed  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      23  (+6)   14  (+2)   21  (+5)   14  (+2)   13  (+1)   17  (+3)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +7,  Con  +10,  Wis  +6,  Cha  +8   Skills  Perception  +11,  Stealth  +7   Damage  Immunities  acid   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  21   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  14  (11,500  XP)      Amphibious.  The  dragon  can  breathe  air  and  water.   Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  dragon  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  can  use  its  Frightful  Presence.   It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  two   with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +11  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  17  (2d10  +  6)  piercing  damage  plus  4   (1d8)  acid  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +11  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  13  (2d6  +  6)  slashing  damage.   Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +11  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  15  (2d8  +  6)  bludgeoning  damage.   Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  dragon's   choice  that  is  within  120  feet  of  the  dragon  and  aware   of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  16  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   become  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat  

the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's  saving   throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  dragon's  Frightful  Presence   for  the  next  24  hours.  
Acid  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  exhales  acid  in   a  60-foot  line  that  is  5  feet  wide.  Each  creature  in  that   line  must  make  a  DC  18  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking   54  (12d8)  acid  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  dragon  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  dragon  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Detect.  The  dragon  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)   check.  
Tail  Attack.  The  dragon  makes  a  tail  attack.  
Wing  Attack  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  dragon  beats  its   wings.  Each  creature  within  10  feet  of  the  dragon   must  succeed  on  a  DC  19  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  13  (2d6  +  6)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be   knocked  prone.  The  dragon  can  then  fly  up  to  half  its   flying  speed.  
  
Young  Black  Dragon  
Large  dragon,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  18  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  127  (15d10  +  45)  
Speed  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   19  (+4)   14  (+2)   17  (+3)   12  (+1)   11  (+0)   15  (+2)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +5,  Con  +6,  Wis  +3,  Cha  +5  
Skills  Perception  +6,  Stealth  +5  
Damage  Immunities  acid  
Senses  blindsight  30  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive   Perception  16  
Languages  Common,  Draconic  
Challenge  7  (2,900  XP)  
  
Amphibious.  The  dragon  can  breathe  air  and  water.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

284-]  {+5.1  

281+}  

Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  makes  three  attacks:  one  with   its  bite  and  two  with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  15  (2d10  +  4)  piercing  damage  plus  4  (1d8)   acid  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  slashing  damage.   Acid  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  exhales  acid  in   a  30-foot  line  that  is  5  feet  wide.  Each  creature  in  that   line  must  make  a  DC  14  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking   49  (11d8)  acid  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.     
Black  Dragon  Wyrmling  
Medium  dragon,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  33  (6d8  +  6)   Speed  30  ft.,  fly  60  ft.,  swim  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   14  (+2)   13  (+1)   10  (+0)   11  (+0)   13  (+1)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +4,  Con  +3,  Wis  +2,  Cha  +3   Skills  Perception  +4,  Stealth  +4   Damage  Immunities  acid   Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  
Perception  14   Languages  Draconic   Challenge  2  (450  XP)        Amphibious.  The  dragon  can  breathe  air  and  water.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (1d10  +  2)  piercing  damage  plus  2  (1d4)   acid  damage.   Acid  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  exhales  acid  in   a  15-foot  line  that  is  5  feet  wide.  Each  creature  in  that   line  must  make  a  DC  11  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking   22  (5d8)  acid  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.     
Blue Dragon
  

Ancient  Blue  Dragon  
Gargantuan  dragon,  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  22  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  481  (26d20  +  208)  
Speed  40  ft.,  burrow  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   29  (+9)   10  (+0)   27  (+8)   18  (+4)   17  (+3)   21  (+5)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +7,  Con  +15,  Wis  +10,  Cha  +12  
Skills  Perception  +17,  Stealth  +7  
Damage  Immunities  lightning  
Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive   Perception  27  
Languages  Common,  Draconic  
Challenge  23  (50,000  XP)  
    
Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  dragon  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  can  use  its  Frightful  Presence.   It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  two   with  its  claws.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +16  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  20  (2d10  +  9)  piercing  damage  plus  11   (2d10)  lightning  damage.  
Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +16  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  16  (2d6  +  9)  slashing  damage.  
Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +16  to  hit,  reach  20  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  18  (2d8  +  9)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  dragon's   choice  that  is  within  120  feet  of  the  dragon  and  aware   of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  20  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   become  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's  saving   throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  dragon's  Frightful  Presence   for  the  next  24  hours.  
Lightning  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  exhales   lightning  in  a  120-foot  line  that  is  10  feet  wide.  Each   creature  in  that  line  must  make  a  DC  23  Dexterity   saving  throw,  taking  88  (16d10)  lightning  damage  on  a   failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

285-]  {+5.1  

282+}  

Legendary  Actions  
The  dragon  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  dragon  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.   Detect.  The  dragon  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)  
check.   Tail  Attack.  The  dragon  makes  a  tail  attack.   Wing  Attack  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  dragon  beats  its  
wings.  Each  creature  within  15  feet  of  the  dragon   must  succeed  on  a  DC  24  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  16  (2d6  +  9)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be   knocked  prone.  The  dragon  can  then  fly  up  to  half  its   flying  speed.     
Adult  Blue  Dragon  
Huge  dragon,  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  19  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  225  (18d12  +  108)   Speed  40  ft.,  burrow  30  ft.,  fly  80  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      25  (+7)   10  (+0)   23  (+6)   16  (+3)   15  (+2)   19  (+4)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +5,  Con  +11,  Wis  +7,  Cha  +9   Skills  Perception  +12,  Stealth  +5   Damage  Immunities  lightning   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  22   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  16  (15,000  XP)        Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  dragon  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  can  use  its  Frightful  Presence.   It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  two   with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +12  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  18  (2d10  +  7)  piercing  damage  plus  5   (1d10)  lightning  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +12  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  14  (2d6  +  7)  slashing  damage.  

Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +12  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  16  (2d8  +  7)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  dragon's   choice  that  is  within  120  feet  of  the  dragon  and  aware   of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  17  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   become  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's  saving   throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  dragon's  Frightful  Presence   for  the  next  24  hours.  
Lightning  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  exhales   lightning  in  a  90-foot  line  that  is  5  feet  wide.  Each   creature  in  that  line  must  make  a  DC  19  Dexterity   saving  throw,  taking  66  (12d10)  lightning  damage  on  a   failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  dragon  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  dragon  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Detect.  The  dragon  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)   check.  
Tail  Attack.  The  dragon  makes  a  tail  attack.  
Wing  Attack  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  dragon  beats  its   wings.  Each  creature  within  10  feet  of  the  dragon   must  succeed  on  a  DC  20  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  14  (2d6  +  7)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be   knocked  prone.  The  dragon  can  then  fly  up  to  half  its   flying  speed.  
  
Young  Blue  Dragon  
Large  dragon,  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  18  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  152  (16d10  +  64)  
Speed  40  ft.,  burrow  20  ft.,  fly  80  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   21  (+5)   10  (+0)   19  (+4)   14  (+2)   13  (+1)   17  (+3)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +4,  Con  +8,  Wis  +5,  Cha  +7  
Skills  Perception  +9,  Stealth  +4  
Damage  Immunities  lightning  
Senses  blindsight  30  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive   Perception  19  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

286-]  {+5.1  

283+}  

Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  9  (5,000  XP)  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  makes  three  attacks:  one  with   its  bite  and  two  with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  16  (2d10  +  5)  piercing  damage  plus  5  (1d10)   lightning  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  12  (2d6  +  5)  slashing  damage.   Lightning  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  exhales   lightning  in  an  60-foot  line  that  is  5  feet  wide.  Each   creature  in  that  line  must  make  a  DC  16  Dexterity   saving  throw,  taking  55  (10d10)  lightning  damage  on  a   failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.     
Blue  Dragon  Wyrmling  
Medium  dragon,  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  52  (8d8  +  16)   Speed  30  ft.,  burrow  15  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      17  (+3)   10  (+0)   15  (+2)   12  (+1)   11  (+0)   15  (+2)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +2,  Con  +4,  Wis  +2,  Cha  +4   Skills  Perception  +4,  Stealth  +2   Damage  Immunities  lightning   Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  
Perception  14   Languages  Draconic   Challenge  3  (700  XP)  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  8  (1d10  +  3)  piercing  damage  plus  3  (1d6)   lightning  damage.   Lightning  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  exhales   lightning  in  a  30-foot  line  that  is  5  feet  wide.  Each   creature  in  that  line  must  make  a  DC  12  Dexterity   saving  throw,  taking  22  (4d10)  lightning  damage  on  a   failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.     

Green Dragon
  
Ancient  Green  Dragon  
Gargantuan  dragon,  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  21  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  385  (22d20  +  154)   Speed  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      27  (+8)   12  (+1)   25  (+7)   20  (+5)   17  (+3)   19  (+4)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +8,  Con  +14,  Wis  +10,  Cha  +11   Skills  Deception  +11,  Insight  +10,  Perception  +17,  
Persuasion  +11,  Stealth  +8   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  27   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  22  (41,000  XP)        Amphibious.  The  dragon  can  breathe  air  and  water.   Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  dragon  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  can  use  its  Frightful  Presence.   It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  two   with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +15  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  19  (2d10  +  8)  piercing  damage  plus  10   (3d6)  poison  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +15  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  22  (4d6  +  8)  slashing  damage.   Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +15  to  hit,  reach  20  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  17  (2d8  +  8)  bludgeoning  damage.   Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  dragon's   choice  that  is  within  120  feet  of  the  dragon  and  aware   of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  19  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   become  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's  saving   throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  dragon's  Frightful  Presence   for  the  next  24  hours.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

287-]  {+5.1  

284+}  

Poison  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  exhales   poisonous  gas  in  a  90-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that   area  must  make  a  DC  22  Constitution  saving  throw,   taking  77  (22d6)  poison  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or   half  as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  dragon  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  dragon  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.   Detect.  The  dragon  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)  
check.   Tail  Attack.  The  dragon  makes  a  tail  attack.   Wing  Attack  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  dragon  beats  its  
wings.  Each  creature  within  15  feet  of  the  dragon   must  succeed  on  a  DC  23  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  15  (2d6  +  8)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be   knocked  prone.  The  dragon  can  then  fly  up  to  half  its   flying  speed.     
Adult  Green  Dragon  
Huge  dragon,  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  19  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  207  (18d12  +  90)   Speed  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      23  (+6)   12  (+1)   21  (+5)   18  (+4)   15  (+2)   17  (+3)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +6,  Con  +10,  Wis  +7,  Cha  +8   Skills  Deception  +8,  Insight  +7,  Perception  +12,  
Persuasion  +8,  Stealth  +6   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  22   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  15  (13,000  XP)        Amphibious.  The  dragon  can  breathe  air  and  water.   Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  dragon  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  

Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  can  use  its  Frightful  Presence.   It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  two   with  its  claws.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +11  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  17  (2d10  +  6)  piercing  damage  plus  7   (2d6)  poison  damage.  
Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +11  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  13  (2d6  +  6)  slashing  damage.  
Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +11  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  15  (2d8  +  6)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  dragon's   choice  that  is  within  120  feet  of  the  dragon  and  aware   of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  16  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   become  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's  saving   throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  dragon's  Frightful  Presence   for  the  next  24  hours.  
Poison  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  exhales   poisonous  gas  in  a  60-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that   area  must  make  a  DC  18  Constitution  saving  throw,   taking  56  (16d6)  poison  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or   half  as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  dragon  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  dragon  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Detect.  The  dragon  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)   check.  
Tail  Attack.  The  dragon  makes  a  tail  attack.  
Wing  Attack  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  dragon  beats  its   wings.  Each  creature  within  10  feet  of  the  dragon   must  succeed  on  a  DC  19  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  13  (2d6  +  6)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be   knocked  prone.  The  dragon  can  then  fly  up  to  half  its   flying  speed.  
  
Young  Green  Dragon  
Large  dragon,  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  18  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  136  (16d10  +  48)  
Speed  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

288-]  {+5.1  

285+}  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   12  (+1)   17  (+3)   16  (+3)   13  (+1)   15  (+2)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +4,  Con  +6,  Wis  +4,  Cha  +5   Skills  Deception  +5,  Perception  +7,  Stealth  +4   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned   Senses  blindsight  30  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  17   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  8  (3,900  XP)        Amphibious.  The  dragon  can  breathe  air  and  water.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  makes  three  attacks:  one  with   its  bite  and  two  with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  15  (2d10  +  4)  piercing  damage  plus  7  (2d6)   poison  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  slashing  damage.   Poison  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  exhales   poisonous  gas  in  a  30-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that   area  must  make  a  DC  14  Constitution  saving  throw,   taking  42  (12d6)  poison  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or   half  as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.     
Green  Dragon  Wyrmling  
Medium  dragon,  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  38  (7d8  +  7)   Speed  30  ft.,  fly  60  ft.,  swim  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   12  (+1)   13  (+1)   14  (+2)   11  (+0)   13  (+1)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +3,  Con  +3,  Wis  +2,  Cha  +3   Skills  Perception  +4,  Stealth  +3   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned   Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  
Perception  14   Languages  Draconic   Challenge  2  (450  XP)  

     Amphibious.  The  dragon  can  breathe  air  and  water.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (1d10  +  2)  piercing  damage  plus  3  (1d6)   poison  damage.   Poison  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  exhales   poisonous  gas  in  a  15-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that   area  must  make  a  DC  11  Constitution  saving  throw,   taking  21  (6d6)  poison  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half   as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.     
Red Dragon
  
Ancient  Red  Dragon  
Gargantuan  dragon,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  22  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  546  (28d20  +  252)   Speed  40  ft.,  climb  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      30  (+10)   10  (+0)   29  (+9)   18  (+4)   15  (+2)   23  (+6)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +7,  Con  +16,  Wis  +9,  Cha  +13   Skills  Perception  +16,  Stealth  +7   Damage  Immunities  fire   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  26   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  24  (62,000  XP)      Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  dragon  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  can  use  its  Frightful  Presence.   It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  two   with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +17  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  21  (2d10  +  10)  piercing  damage  plus  14   (4d6)  fire  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +17  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  17  (2d6  +  10)  slashing  damage.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

289-]  {+5.1  

286+}  

Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +17  to  hit,  reach  20  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  19  (2d8  +  10)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  dragon's   choice  that  is  within  120  feet  of  the  dragon  and  aware   of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  21  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   become  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's  saving   throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  dragon's  Frightful  Presence   for  the  next  24  hours.  
Fire  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  exhales  fire  in   a  90-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  make  a   DC  24  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  91  (26d6)  fire   damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on  a   successful  one.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  dragon  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  dragon  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Detect.  The  dragon  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)   check.  
Tail  Attack.  The  dragon  makes  a  tail  attack.  
Wing  Attack  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  dragon  beats  its   wings.  Each  creature  within  15  feet  of  the  dragon   must  succeed  on  a  DC  25  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  17  (2d6  +  10)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be   knocked  prone.  The  dragon  can  then  fly  up  to  half  its   flying  speed.  
  
Adult  Red  Dragon  
Huge  dragon,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  19  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  256  (19d12  +  133)  
Speed  40  ft.,  climb  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   27  (+8)   10  (+0)   25  (+7)   16  (+3)   13  (+1)   21  (+5)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +6,  Con  +13,  Wis  +7,  Cha  +11  
Skills  Perception  +13,  Stealth  +6  
Damage  Immunities  fire  
Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive   Perception  23  

Languages  Common,  Draconic  
Challenge  17  (18,000  XP)  
    
Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  dragon  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  can  use  its  Frightful  Presence.   It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  two   with  its  claws.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +14  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  19  (2d10  +  8)  piercing  damage  plus  7   (2d6)  fire  damage.  
Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +14  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  15  (2d6  +  8)  slashing  damage.  
Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +14  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  17  (2d8  +  8)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  dragon's   choice  that  is  within  120  feet  of  the  dragon  and  aware   of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  19  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   become  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's  saving   throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  dragon's  Frightful  Presence   for  the  next  24  hours.  
Fire  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  exhales  fire  in   a  60-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  make  a   DC  21  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  63  (18d6)  fire   damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on  a   successful  one.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  dragon  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  dragon  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Detect.  The  dragon  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)   check.  
Tail  Attack.  The  dragon  makes  a  tail  attack.  
Wing  Attack  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  dragon  beats  its   wings.  Each  creature  within  10  feet  of  the  dragon   must  succeed  on  a  DC  22  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  15  (2d6  +  8)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be   knocked  prone.  The  dragon  can  then  fly  up  to  half  its   flying  speed.  
  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

290-]  {+5.1  

287+}  

Young  Red  Dragon  
Large  dragon,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  18  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  178  (17d10  +  85)   Speed  40  ft.,  climb  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      23  (+6)   10  (+0)   21  (+5)   14  (+2)   11  (+0)   19  (+4)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +4,  Con  +9,  Wis  +4,  Cha  +8   Skills  Perception  +8,  Stealth  +4   Damage  Immunities  fire   Senses  blindsight  30  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  18   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  10  (5,900  XP)  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  makes  three  attacks:  one  with   its  bite  and  two  with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  17  (2d10  +  6)  piercing  damage  plus  3   (1d6)  fire  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  13  (2d6  +  6)  slashing  damage.   Fire  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  exhales  fire  in   a  30-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  make  a   DC  17  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  56  (16d6)  fire   damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on  a   successful  one.     
Red  Dragon  Wyrmling  
Medium  dragon,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  75  (10d8  +  30)   Speed  30  ft.,  climb  30  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   10  (+0)   17  (+3)   12  (+1)   11  (+0)   15  (+2)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +2,  Con  +5,  Wis  +2,  Cha  +4   Skills  Perception  +4,  Stealth  +2   Damage  Immunities  fire   Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  
Perception  14   Languages  Draconic  

Challenge  4  (1,100  XP)  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  9  (1d10  +  4)  piercing  damage  plus  3  (1d6)   fire  damage.   Fire  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  exhales  fire  in   a  15-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  make  a   DC  13  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  24  (7d6)  fire   damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on  a   successful  one.     
White Dragon
  
Ancient  White  Dragon  
Gargantuan  dragon,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  20  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  333  (18d20  +  144)   Speed  40  ft.,  burrow  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      26  (+8)   10  (+0)   26  (+8)   10  (+0)   13  (+1)   14  (+2)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +6,  Con  +14,  Wis  +7,  Cha  +8   Skills  Perception  +13,  Stealth  +6   Damage  Immunities  cold   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  23   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  20  (25,000  XP)        Ice  Walk.  The  dragon  can  move  across  and  climb  icy   surfaces  without  needing  to  make  an  ability  check.   Additionally,  difficult  terrain  composed  of  ice  or  snow   doesn't  cost  it  extra  moment.   Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  dragon  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  can  use  its  Frightful  Presence.   It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  two   with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +14  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  19  (2d10  +  8)  piercing  damage  plus  9   (2d8)  cold  damage.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

291-]  {+5.1  

288+}  

Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +14  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  15  (2d6  +  8)  slashing  damage.  
Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +14  to  hit,  reach  20  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  17  (2d8  +  8)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  dragon's   choice  that  is  within  120  feet  of  the  dragon  and  aware   of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  16  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   become  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's  saving   throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  dragon's  Frightful  Presence   for  the  next  24  hours.  
Cold  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  exhales  an  icy   blast  in  a  90-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must   make  a  DC  22  Constitution  saving  throw,  taking  72   (16d8)  cold  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  dragon  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  dragon  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Detect.  The  dragon  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)   check.  
Tail  Attack.  The  dragon  makes  a  tail  attack.  
Wing  Attack  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  dragon  beats  its   wings.  Each  creature  within  15  feet  of  the  dragon   must  succeed  on  a  DC  22  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  15  (2d6  +  8)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be   knocked  prone.  The  dragon  can  then  fly  up  to  half  its   flying  speed.  
  
Adult  White  Dragon  
Huge  dragon,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  18  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  200  (16d12  +  96)  
Speed  40  ft.,  burrow  30  ft.,  fly  80  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   22  (+6)   10  (+0)   22  (+6)   8  (-1)   12  (+1)   12  (+1)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +5,  Con  +11,  Wis  +6,  Cha  +6  
Skills  Perception  +11,  Stealth  +5  
Damage  Immunities  cold  

Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive   Perception  21  
Languages  Common,  Draconic  
Challenge  13  (10,000  XP)  
    
Ice  Walk.  The  dragon  can  move  across  and  climb  icy   surfaces  without  needing  to  make  an  ability  check.   Additionally,  difficult  terrain  composed  of  ice  or  snow   doesn't  cost  it  extra  moment.  
Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  dragon  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  can  use  its  Frightful  Presence.   It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  two   with  its  claws.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +11  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  17  (2d10  +  6)  piercing  damage  plus  4   (1d8)  cold  damage.  
Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +11  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  13  (2d6  +  6)  slashing  damage.  
Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +11  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  15  (2d8  +  6)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  dragon's   choice  that  is  within  120  feet  of  the  dragon  and  aware   of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  14  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   become  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's  saving   throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  dragon's  Frightful  Presence   for  the  next  24  hours.  
Cold  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  exhales  an  icy   blast  in  a  60-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must   make  a  DC  19  Constitution  saving  throw,  taking  54   (12d8)  cold  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  dragon  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  dragon  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Detect.  The  dragon  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)   check.  
Tail  Attack.  The  dragon  makes  a  tail  attack.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

292-]  {+5.1  

289+}  

Wing  Attack  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  dragon  beats  its   wings.  Each  creature  within  10  feet  of  the  dragon   must  succeed  on  a  DC  19  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  13  (2d6  +  6)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be   knocked  prone.  The  dragon  can  then  fly  up  to  half  its   flying  speed.  
  
Young  White  Dragon  
Large  dragon,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  133  (14d10  +  56)   Speed  40  ft.,  burrow  20  ft.,  fly  80  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   10  (+0)   18  (+4)   6  (-2)   11  (+0)   12  (+1)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +3,  Con  +7,  Wis  +3,  Cha  +4   Skills  Perception  +6,  Stealth  +3   Damage  Immunities  cold   Senses  blindsight  30  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  16   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  6  (2,300  XP)        Ice  Walk.  The  dragon  can  move  across  and  climb  icy   surfaces  without  needing  to  make  an  ability  check.   Additionally,  difficult  terrain  composed  of  ice  or  snow   doesn't  cost  it  extra  moment.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  makes  three  attacks:  one  with   its  bite  and  two  with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  15  (2d10  +  4)  piercing  damage  plus  4  (1d8)   cold  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  slashing  damage.   Cold  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  exhales  an  icy   blast  in  a  30-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must   make  a  DC  15  Constitution  saving  throw,  taking  45   (10d8)  cold  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.     
White  Dragon  Wyrmling  
Medium  dragon,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  16  (natural  armor)  

Hit  Points  32  (5d8  +  10)   Speed  30  ft.,  burrow  15  ft.,  fly  60  ft.,  swim  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      14  (+2)   10  (+0)   14  (+2)   5  (-3)   10  (+0)   11  (+0)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +2,  Con  +4,  Wis  +2,  Cha  +2   Skills  Perception  +4,  Stealth  +2   Damage  Immunities  cold   Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  
Perception  14   Languages  Draconic   Challenge  2  (450  XP)  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (1d10  +  2)  piercing  damage  plus  2  (1d4)   cold  damage.   Cold  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  exhales  an  icy   blast  of  hail  in  a  15-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that   area  must  make  a  DC  12  Constitution  saving  throw,   taking  22  (5d8)  cold  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as   much  damage  on  a  successful  one.     
Dragons, Metallic
Brass Dragon
  
Ancient  Brass  Dragon  
Gargantuan  dragon,  chaotic  good  
Armor  Class  20  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  297  (17d20  +  119)   Speed  40  ft.,  burrow  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      27  (+8)   10  (+0)   25  (+7)   16  (+3)   15  (+2)   19  (+4)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +6,  Con  +13,  Wis  +8,  Cha  +10   Skills  History  +9,  Perception  +14,  Persuasion  +10,  
Stealth  +6   Damage  Immunities  fire   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  24   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  20  (25,000  XP)       

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

293-]  {+5.1  

290+}  

Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  dragon  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  can  use  its  Frightful  Presence.   It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  two   with  its  claws.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +14  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  19  (2d10  +  8)  piercing  damage.  
Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +14  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  15  (2d6  +  8)  slashing  damage.  
Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +14  to  hit,  reach  20  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  17  (2d8  +  8)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  dragon's   choice  that  is  within  120  feet  of  the  dragon  and  aware   of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  18  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   become  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's  saving   throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  dragon's  Frightful  Presence   for  the  next  24  hours.  
Breath  Weapons  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  uses  one   of  the  following  breath  weapons:  
Fire  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  fire  in  an  90-foot  line   that  is  10  feet  wide.  Each  creature  in  that  line  must   make  a  DC  21  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  56   (16d6)  fire  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Sleep  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  sleep  gas  in  a  90-foot   cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  succeed  on  a   DC  21  Constitution  saving  throw  or  fall  unconscious   for  10  minutes.  This  effect  ends  for  a  creature  if  the   creature  takes  damage  or  someone  uses  an  action  to   wake  it.  
Change  Shape.  The  dragon  magically  polymorphs  into   a  humanoid  or  beast  that  has  a  challenge  rating  no   higher  than  its  own,  or  back  into  its  true  form.  It   reverts  to  its  true  form  if  it  dies.  Any  equipment  it  is   wearing  or  carrying  is  absorbed  or  borne  by  the  new   form  (the  dragon's  choice).      In  a  new  form,  the  dragon  retains  its  alignment,  hit   points,  Hit  Dice,  ability  to  speak,  proficiencies,   Legendary  Resistance,  lair  actions,  and  Intelligence,   Wisdom,  and  Charisma  scores,  as  well  as  this  action.  Its   statistics  and  capabilities  are  otherwise  replaced  by   those  of  the  new  form,  except  any  class  features  or   legendary  actions  of  that  form.  

Legendary  Actions  
The  dragon  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  dragon  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.   Detect.  The  dragon  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)  
check.   Tail  Attack.  The  dragon  makes  a  tail  attack.   Wing  Attack  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  dragon  beats  its  
wings.  Each  creature  within  15  feet  of  the  dragon   must  succeed  on  a  DC  22  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  15  (2d6  +  8)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be   knocked  prone.  The  dragon  can  then  fly  up  to  half  its   flying  speed.     
Adult  Brass  Dragon  
Huge  dragon,  chaotic  good  
Armor  Class  18  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  172  (15d12  +  75)   Speed  40  ft.,  burrow  30  ft.,  fly  80  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      23  (+6)   10  (+0)   21  (+5)   14  (+2)   13  (+1)   17  (+3)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +5,  Con  +10,  Wis  +6,  Cha  +8   Skills  History  +7,  Perception  +11,  Persuasion  +8,  Stealth  
+5   Damage  Immunities  fire   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  21   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  13  (10,000  XP)        Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  dragon  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  can  use  its  Frightful  Presence.   It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  two   with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +11  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  17  (2d10  +  6)  piercing  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +11  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  13  (2d6  +  6)  slashing  damage.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

294-]  {+5.1  

291+}  

Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +11  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  15  (2d8  +  6)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  dragon's   choice  that  is  within  120  feet  of  the  dragon  and  aware   of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  16  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   become  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's  saving   throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  dragon's  Frightful  Presence   for  the  next  24  hours.  
Breath  Weapons  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  uses  one   of  the  following  breath  weapons.  
Fire  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  fire  in  an  60-foot  line   that  is  5  feet  wide.  Each  creature  in  that  line  must   make  a  DC  18  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  45   (13d6)  fire  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Sleep  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  sleep  gas  in  a  60-foot   cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  succeed  on  a   DC  18  Constitution  saving  throw  or  fall  unconscious   for  10  minutes.  This  effect  ends  for  a  creature  if  the   creature  takes  damage  or  someone  uses  an  action  to   wake  it.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  dragon  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  dragon  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Detect.  The  dragon  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)   check.  
Tail  Attack.  The  dragon  makes  a  tail  attack.  
Wing  Attack  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  dragon  beats  its   wings.  Each  creature  within  10  feet  of  the  dragon   must  succeed  on  a  DC  19  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  13  (2d6  +  6)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be   knocked  prone.  The  dragon  can  then  fly  up  to  half  its   flying  speed.  
  
Young  Brass  Dragon  
Large  dragon,  chaotic  good  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  110  (13d10  +  39)  
Speed  40  ft.,  burrow  20  ft.,  fly  80  ft.  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   10  (+0)   17  (+3)   12  (+1)   11  (+0)   15  (+2)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +3,  Con  +6,  Wis  +3,  Cha  +5   Skills  Perception  +6,  Persuasion  +5,  Stealth  +3   Damage  Immunities  fire   Senses  blindsight  30  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  16   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  6  (2,300  XP)  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  makes  three  attacks:  one  with   its  bite  and  two  with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  15  (2d10  +  4)  piercing  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  slashing  damage.   Breath  Weapons  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  uses  one   of  the  following  breath  weapons.   Fire  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  fire  in  a  40-foot  line  
that  is  5  feet  wide.  Each  creature  in  that  line  must   make  a  DC  14  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  42   (12d6)  fire  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.   Sleep  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  sleep  gas  in  a  30-foot   cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  succeed  on  a   DC  14  Constitution  saving  throw  or  fall  unconscious   for  5  minutes.  This  effect  ends  for  a  creature  if  the   creature  takes  damage  or  someone  uses  an  action  to   wake  it.     
Brass  Dragon  Wyrmling  
Medium  dragon,  chaotic  good  
Armor  Class  16  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  16  (3d8  +  3)   Speed  30  ft.,  burrow  15  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   10  (+0)   13  (+1)   10  (+0)   11  (+0)   13  (+1)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +2,  Con  +3,  Wis  +2,  Cha  +3   Skills  Perception  +4,  Stealth  +2   Damage  Immunities  fire   Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  
Perception  14  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

295-]  {+5.1  

292+}  

Languages  Draconic   Challenge  1  (200  XP)  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (1d10  +  2)  piercing  damage.   Breath  Weapons  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  uses  one   of  the  following  breath  weapons.   Fire  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  fire  in  an  20-foot  line  
that  is  5  feet  wide.  Each  creature  in  that  line  must   make  a  DC  11  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  14  (4d6)   fire  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage   on  a  successful  one.   Sleep  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  sleep  gas  in  a  15-foot   cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  succeed  on  a   DC  11  Constitution  saving  throw  or  fall  unconscious   for  1  minute.  This  effect  ends  for  a  creature  if  the   creature  takes  damage  or  someone  uses  an  action  to   wake  it.     
Bronze Dragon
  
Ancient  Bronze  Dragon  
Gargantuan  dragon,  lawful  good  
Armor  Class  22  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  444  (24d20  +  192)   Speed  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      29  (+9)   10  (+0)   27  (+8)   18  (+4)   17  (+3)   21  (+5)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +7,  Con  +15,  Wis  +10,  Cha  +12   Skills  Insight  +10,  Perception  +17,  Stealth  +7   Damage  Immunities  lightning   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  27   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  22  (41,000  XP)        Amphibious.  The  dragon  can  breathe  air  and  water.   Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  dragon  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  

Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  can  use  its  Frightful  Presence.   It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  two   with  its  claws.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +16  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  20  (2d10  +  9)  piercing  damage.  
Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +16  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  16  (2d6  +  9)  slashing  damage.  
Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +16  to  hit,  reach  20  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  18  (2d8  +  9)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  dragon's   choice  that  is  within  120  feet  of  the  dragon  and  aware   of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  20  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   become  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's  saving   throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  dragon's  Frightful  Presence   for  the  next  24  hours.  
Breath  Weapons  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  uses  one   of  the  following  breath  weapons.  
Lightning  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  lightning  in  a   120-foot  line  that  is  10  feet  wide.  Each  creature  in   that  line  must  make  a  DC  23  Dexterity  saving  throw,   taking  88  (16d10)  lightning  damage  on  a  failed  save,   or  half  as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Repulsion  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  repulsion  energy   in  a  30-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must   succeed  on  a  DC  23  Strength  saving  throw.  On  a   failed  save,  the  creature  is  pushed  60  feet  away  from   the  dragon.  
Change  Shape.  The  dragon  magically  polymorphs  into   a  humanoid  or  beast  that  has  a  challenge  rating  no   higher  than  its  own,  or  back  into  its  true  form.  It   reverts  to  its  true  form  if  it  dies.  Any  equipment  it  is   wearing  or  carrying  is  absorbed  or  borne  by  the  new   form  (the  dragon's  choice).      In  a  new  form,  the  dragon  retains  its  alignment,  hit   points,  Hit  Dice,  ability  to  speak,  proficiencies,   Legendary  Resistance,  lair  actions,  and  Intelligence,   Wisdom,  and  Charisma  scores,  as  well  as  this  action.  Its   statistics  and  capabilities  are  otherwise  replaced  by   those  of  the  new  form,  except  any  class  features  or   legendary  actions  of  that  form.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  dragon  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

296-]  {+5.1  

293+}  

option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  dragon  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.   Detect.  The  dragon  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)  
check.   Tail  Attack.  The  dragon  makes  a  tail  attack.   Wing  Attack  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  dragon  beats  its  
wings.  Each  creature  within  15  feet  of  the  dragon   must  succeed  on  a  DC  24  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  16  (2d6  +  9)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be   knocked  prone.  The  dragon  can  then  fly  up  to  half  its   flying  speed.     
Adult  Bronze  Dragon  
Huge  dragon,  lawful  good  
Armor  Class  19  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  212  (17d12  +  102)   Speed  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      25  (+7)   10  (+0)   23  (+6)   16  (+3)   15  (+2)   19  (+4)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +5,  Con  +11,  Wis  +7,  Cha  +9   Skills  Insight  +7,  Perception  +12,  Stealth  +5   Damage  Immunities  lightning   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  22   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  15  (13,000  XP)        Amphibious.  The  dragon  can  breathe  air  and  water.   Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  dragon  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  can  use  its  Frightful  Presence.   It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  two   with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +12  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  18  (2d10  +  7)  piercing  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +12  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  14  (2d6  +  7)  slashing  damage.   Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +12  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  16  (2d8  +  7)  bludgeoning  damage.   Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  dragon's   choice  that  is  within  120  feet  of  the  dragon  and  aware  

of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  17  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   become  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's  saving   throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  dragon's  Frightful  Presence   for  the  next  24  hours.  
Breath  Weapons  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  uses  one   of  the  following  breath  weapons.  
Lightning  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  lightning  in  a  90- foot  line  that  is  5  feet  wide.  Each  creature  in  that  line   must  make  a  DC  19  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  66   (12d10)  lightning  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as   much  damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Repulsion  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  repulsion  energy   in  a  30-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must   succeed  on  a  DC  19  Strength  saving  throw.  On  a   failed  save,  the  creature  is  pushed  60  feet  away  from   the  dragon.  
Change  Shape.  The  dragon  magically  polymorphs  into   a  humanoid  or  beast  that  has  a  challenge  rating  no   higher  than  its  own,  or  back  into  its  true  form.  It   reverts  to  its  true  form  if  it  dies.  Any  equipment  it  is   wearing  or  carrying  is  absorbed  or  borne  by  the  new   form  (the  dragon's  choice).      In  a  new  form,  the  dragon  retains  its  alignment,  hit   points,  Hit  Dice,  ability  to  speak,  proficiencies,   Legendary  Resistance,  lair  actions,  and  Intelligence,   Wisdom,  and  Charisma  scores,  as  well  as  this  action.  Its   statistics  and  capabilities  are  otherwise  replaced  by   those  of  the  new  form,  except  any  class  features  or   legendary  actions  of  that  form.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  dragon  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  dragon  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Detect.  The  dragon  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)   check.  
Tail  Attack.  The  dragon  makes  a  tail  attack.  
Wing  Attack  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  dragon  beats  its   wings.  Each  creature  within  10  feet  of  the  dragon   must  succeed  on  a  DC  20  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  14  (2d6  +  7)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be   knocked  prone.  The  dragon  can  then  fly  up  to  half  its   flying  speed.  
  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

297-]  {+5.1  

294+}  

Young  Bronze  Dragon  
Large  dragon,  lawful  good  
Armor  Class  18  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  142  (15d10  +  60)   Speed  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      21  (+5)   10  (+0)   19  (+4)   14  (+2)   13  (+1)   17  (+3)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +3,  Con  +7,  Wis  +4,  Cha  +6   Skills  Insight  +4,  Perception  +7,  Stealth  +3   Damage  Immunities  lightning   Senses  blindsight  30  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  17   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  8  (3,900  XP)        Amphibious.  The  dragon  can  breathe  air  and  water.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  makes  three  attacks:  one  with   its  bite  and  two  with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  16  (2d10  +  5)  piercing  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  12  (2d6  +  5)  slashing  damage.   Breath  Weapons  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  uses  one   of  the  following  breath  weapons.   Lightning  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  lightning  in  a  60-
foot  line  that  is  5  feet  wide.  Each  creature  in  that  line   must  make  a  DC  15  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  55   (10d10)  lightning  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as   much  damage  on  a  successful  one.   Repulsion  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  repulsion  energy   in  a  30-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must   succeed  on  a  DC  15  Strength  saving  throw.  On  a   failed  save,  the  creature  is  pushed  40  feet  away  from   the  dragon.     
Bronze  Dragon  Wyrmling  
Medium  dragon,  lawful  good  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  32  (5d8  +  10)   Speed  30  ft.,  fly  60  ft.,  swim  30  ft.  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      17  (+3)   10  (+0)   15  (+2)   12  (+1)   11  (+0)   15  (+2)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +2,  Con  +4,  Wis  +2,  Cha  +4   Skills  Perception  +4,  Stealth  +2   Damage  Immunities  lightning   Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  
Perception  14   Languages  Draconic   Challenge  2  (450  XP)        Amphibious.  The  dragon  can  breathe  air  and  water.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  8  (1d10  +  3)  piercing  damage.   Breath  Weapons  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  uses  one   of  the  following  breath  weapons.   Lightning  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  lightning  in  a  40-
foot  line  that  is  5  feet  wide.  Each  creature  in  that  line   must  make  a  DC  12  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  16   (3d10)  lightning  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as   much  damage  on  a  successful  one.   Repulsion  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  repulsion  energy   in  a  30-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must   succeed  on  a  DC  12  Strength  saving  throw.  On  a   failed  save,  the  creature  is  pushed  30  feet  away  from   the  dragon.     
Copper Dragon
  
Ancient  Copper  Dragon  
Gargantuan  dragon,  chaotic  good  
Armor  Class  21  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  350  (20d20  +  140)   Speed  40  ft.,  climb  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      27  (+8)   12  (+1)   25  (+7)   20  (+5)   17  (+3)   19  (+4)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +8,  Con  +14,  Wis  +10,  Cha  +11   Skills  Deception  +11,  Perception  +17,  Stealth  +8   Damage  Immunities  acid   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  27  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

298-]  {+5.1  

295+}  

Languages  Common,  Draconic  
Challenge  21  (33,000  XP)  
    
Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  dragon  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  can  use  its  Frightful  Presence.   It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  two   with  its  claws.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +15  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  19  (2d10  +  8)  piercing  damage.  
Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +15  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  15  (2d6  +  8)  slashing  damage.  
Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +15  to  hit,  reach  20  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  17  (2d8  +  8)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  dragon's   choice  that  is  within  120  feet  of  the  dragon  and  aware   of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  19  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   become  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's  saving   throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  dragon's  Frightful  Presence   for  the  next  24  hours.  
Breath  Weapons  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  uses  one   of  the  following  breath  weapons.  
Acid  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  acid  in  an  90-foot  line   that  is  10  feet  wide.  Each  creature  in  that  line  must   make  a  DC  22  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  63   (14d8)  acid  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Slowing  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  gas  in  a  90-foot   cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  succeed  on  a   DC  22  Constitution  saving  throw.  On  a  failed  save,   the  creature  can't  use  reactions,  its  speed  is  halved,   and  it  can't  make  more  than  one  attack  on  its  turn.   In  addition,  the  creature  can  use  either  an  action  or  a   bonus  action  on  its  turn,  but  not  both.  These  effects   last  for  1  minute.  The  creature  can  repeat  the  saving   throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending  the   effect  on  itself  with  a  successful  save.  
Change  Shape.  The  dragon  magically  polymorphs  into   a  humanoid  or  beast  that  has  a  challenge  rating  no   higher  than  its  own,  or  back  into  its  true  form.  It   reverts  to  its  true  form  if  it  dies.  Any  equipment  it  is   wearing  or  carrying  is  absorbed  or  borne  by  the  new   form  (the  dragon's  choice).  

   In  a  new  form,  the  dragon  retains  its  alignment,  hit   points,  Hit  Dice,  ability  to  speak,  proficiencies,   Legendary  Resistance,  lair  actions,  and  Intelligence,   Wisdom,  and  Charisma  scores,  as  well  as  this  action.  Its   statistics  and  capabilities  are  otherwise  replaced  by   those  of  the  new  form,  except  any  class  features  or   legendary  actions  of  that  form.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  dragon  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  dragon  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Detect.  The  dragon  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)   check.  
Tail  Attack.  The  dragon  makes  a  tail  attack.   Wing  Attack  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  dragon  beats  its  
wings.  Each  creature  within  15  feet  of  the  dragon   must  succeed  on  a  DC  23  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  15  (2d6  +  8)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be   knocked  prone.  The  dragon  can  then  fly  up  to  half  its   flying  speed.  
  
Adult  Copper  Dragon  
Huge  dragon,  chaotic  good  
Armor  Class  18  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  184  (16d12  +  80)   Speed  40  ft.,  climb  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   23  (+6)   12  (+1)   21  (+5)   18  (+4)   15  (+2)   17  (+3)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +6,  Con  +10,  Wis  +7,  Cha  +8   Skills  Deception  +8,  Perception  +12,  Stealth  +6   Damage  Immunities  acid  
Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive   Perception  22  
Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  14  (11,500  XP)  
     Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  dragon  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

299-]  {+5.1  

296+}  

Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  can  use  its  Frightful  Presence.   It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  two   with  its  claws.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +11  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  17  (2d10  +  6)  piercing  damage.  
Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +11  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  13  (2d6  +  6)  slashing  damage.  
Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +11  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  15  (2d8  +  6)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  dragon's   choice  that  is  within  120  feet  of  the  dragon  and  aware   of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  16  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   become  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's  saving   throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  dragon's  Frightful  Presence   for  the  next  24  hours.  
Breath  Weapons  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  uses  one   of  the  following  breath  weapons.  
Acid  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  acid  in  an  60-foot  line   that  is  5  feet  wide.  Each  creature  in  that  line  must   make  a  DC  18  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  54   (12d8)  acid  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Slowing  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  gas  in  a  60-foot   cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  succeed  on  a   DC  18  Constitution  saving  throw.  On  a  failed  save,   the  creature  can't  use  reactions,  its  speed  is  halved,   and  it  can't  make  more  than  one  attack  on  its  turn.   In  addition,  the  creature  can  use  either  an  action  or  a   bonus  action  on  its  turn,  but  not  both.  These  effects   last  for  1  minute.  The  creature  can  repeat  the  saving   throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending  the   effect  on  itself  with  a  successful  save.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  dragon  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  dragon  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Detect.  The  dragon  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)   check.  
Tail  Attack.  The  dragon  makes  a  tail  attack.  

Wing  Attack  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  dragon  beats  its   wings.  Each  creature  within  10  feet  of  the  dragon   must  succeed  on  a  DC  19  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  13  (2d6  +  6)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be   knocked  prone.  The  dragon  can  then  fly  up  to  half  its   flying  speed.  
  
Young  Copper  Dragon  
Large  dragon,  chaotic  good  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  119  (14d10  +  42)   Speed  40  ft.,  climb  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   12  (+1)   17  (+3)   16  (+3)   13  (+1)   15  (+2)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +4,  Con  +6,  Wis  +4,  Cha  +5   Skills  Deception  +5,  Perception  +7,  Stealth  +4   Damage  Immunities  acid   Senses  blindsight  30  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  17   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  7  (2,900  XP)  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  makes  three  attacks:  one  with   its  bite  and  two  with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  15  (2d10  +  4)  piercing  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  slashing  damage.   Breath  Weapons  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  uses  one   of  the  following  breath  weapons.   Acid  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  acid  in  an  40-foot  line  
that  is  5  feet  wide.  Each  creature  in  that  line  must   make  a  DC  14  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  40  (9d8)   acid  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

300-]  {+5.1  

297+}  

Slowing  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  gas  in  a  30-foot   cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  succeed  on  a   DC  14  Constitution  saving  throw.  On  a  failed  save,   the  creature  can't  use  reactions,  its  speed  is  halved,   and  it  can't  make  more  than  one  attack  on  its  turn.   In  addition,  the  creature  can  use  either  an  action  or  a   bonus  action  on  its  turn,  but  not  both.  These  effects   last  for  1  minute.  The  creature  can  repeat  the  saving   throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending  the   effect  on  itself  with  a  successful  save.  
  
Copper  Dragon  Wyrmling  
Medium  dragon,  chaotic  good  
Armor  Class  16  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  22  (4d8  +  4)  
Speed  30  ft.,  climb  30  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   15  (+2)   12  (+1)   13  (+1)   14  (+2)   11  (+0)   13  (+1)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +3,  Con  +3,  Wis  +2,  Cha  +3  
Skills  Perception  +4,  Stealth  +3  
Damage  Immunities  acid  
Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive   Perception  14  
Languages  Draconic  
Challenge  1  (200  XP)  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (1d10  +  2)  piercing  damage.  
Breath  Weapons  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  uses  one   of  the  following  breath  weapons.  
Acid  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  acid  in  an  20-foot  line   that  is  5  feet  wide.  Each  creature  in  that  line  must   make  a  DC  11  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  18  (4d8)   acid  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Slowing  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  gas  in  a  15-foot   cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  succeed  on  a   DC  11  Constitution  saving  throw.  On  a  failed  save,   the  creature  can't  use  reactions,  its  speed  is  halved,   and  it  can't  make  more  than  one  attack  on  its  turn.   In  addition,  the  creature  can  use  either  an  action  or  a   bonus  action  on  its  turn,  but  not  both.  These  effects   last  for  1  minute.  The  creature  can  repeat  the  saving   throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending  the   effect  on  itself  with  a  successful  save.  

  
Gold Dragon
  
Ancient  Gold  Dragon  
Gargantuan  dragon,  lawful  good  
Armor  Class  22  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  546  (28d20  +  252)   Speed  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      30  (+10)   14  (+2)   29  (+9)   18  (+4)   17  (+3)   28  (+9)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +9,  Con  +16,  Wis  +10,  Cha  +16   Skills  Insight  +10,  Perception  +17,  Persuasion  +16,  
Stealth  +9   Damage  Immunities  fire   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  27   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  24  (62,000  XP)        Amphibious.  The  dragon  can  breathe  air  and  water.   Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  dragon  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  can  use  its  Frightful  Presence.   It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  two   with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +17  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  21  (2d10  +  10)  piercing  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +17  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  17  (2d6  +  10)  slashing  damage.   Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +17  to  hit,  reach  20  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  19  (2d8  +  10)  bludgeoning  damage.   Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  dragon's   choice  that  is  within  120  feet  of  the  dragon  and  aware   of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  24  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   become  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's  saving   throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  dragon's  Frightful  Presence   for  the  next  24  hours.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

301-]  {+5.1  

298+}  

Breath  Weapons  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  uses  one   of  the  following  breath  weapons.  
Fire  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  fire  in  a  90-foot  cone.   Each  creature  in  that  area  must  make  a  DC  24   Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  71  (13d10)  fire   damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on   a  successful  one.  
Weakening  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  gas  in  a  90-foot   cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  succeed  on  a   DC  24  Strength  saving  throw  or  have  disadvantage   on  Strength-based  attack  rolls,  Strength  checks,  and   Strength  saving  throws  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can   repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its   turns,  ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  
Change  Shape.  The  dragon  magically  polymorphs  into   a  humanoid  or  beast  that  has  a  challenge  rating  no   higher  than  its  own,  or  back  into  its  true  form.  It   reverts  to  its  true  form  if  it  dies.  Any  equipment  it  is   wearing  or  carrying  is  absorbed  or  borne  by  the  new   form  (the  dragon's  choice).      In  a  new  form,  the  dragon  retains  its  alignment,  hit   points,  Hit  Dice,  ability  to  speak,  proficiencies,   Legendary  Resistance,  lair  actions,  and  Intelligence,   Wisdom,  and  Charisma  scores,  as  well  as  this  action.  Its   statistics  and  capabilities  are  otherwise  replaced  by   those  of  the  new  form,  except  any  class  features  or   legendary  actions  of  that  form.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  dragon  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  dragon  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Detect.  The  dragon  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)   check.  
Tail  Attack.  The  dragon  makes  a  tail  attack.  
Wing  Attack  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  dragon  beats  its   wings.  Each  creature  within  15  feet  of  the  dragon   must  succeed  on  a  DC  25  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  17  (2d6  +  10)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be   knocked  prone.  The  dragon  can  then  fly  up  to  half  its   flying  speed.  
  
Adult  Gold  Dragon  
Huge  dragon,  lawful  good  
Armor  Class  19  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  256  (19d12  +  133)  

Speed  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      27  (+8)   14  (+2)   25  (+7)   16  (+3)   15  (+2)   24  (+7)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +8,  Con  +13,  Wis  +8,  Cha  +13  
Skills  Insight  +8,  Perception  +14,  Persuasion  +13,   Stealth  +8  
Damage  Immunities  fire   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  24   Languages  Common,  Draconic  
Challenge  17  (18,000  XP)       
Amphibious.  The  dragon  can  breathe  air  and  water.   Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  dragon  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  can  use  its  Frightful  Presence.   It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  two   with  its  claws.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +14  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  19  (2d10  +  8)  piercing  damage.  
Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +14  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  15  (2d6  +  8)  slashing  damage.  
Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +14  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  17  (2d8  +  8)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  dragon's   choice  that  is  within  120  feet  of  the  dragon  and  aware   of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  21  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   become  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's  saving   throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  dragon's  Frightful  Presence   for  the  next  24  hours.  
Breath  Weapons  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  uses  one   of  the  following  breath  weapons.  
Fire  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  fire  in  a  60-foot  cone.   Each  creature  in  that  area  must  make  a  DC  21   Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  66  (12d10)  fire   damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on   a  successful  one.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

302-]  {+5.1  

299+}  

Weakening  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  gas  in  a  60-foot   cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  succeed  on  a   DC  21  Strength  saving  throw  or  have  disadvantage   on  Strength-based  attack  rolls,  Strength  checks,  and   Strength  saving  throws  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can   repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its   turns,  ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  
Change  Shape.  The  dragon  magically  polymorphs  into   a  humanoid  or  beast  that  has  a  challenge  rating  no   higher  than  its  own,  or  back  into  its  true  form.  It   reverts  to  its  true  form  if  it  dies.  Any  equipment  it  is   wearing  or  carrying  is  absorbed  or  borne  by  the  new   form  (the  dragon's  choice).      In  a  new  form,  the  dragon  retains  its  alignment,  hit   points,  Hit  Dice,  ability  to  speak,  proficiencies,   Legendary  Resistance,  lair  actions,  and  Intelligence,   Wisdom,  and  Charisma  scores,  as  well  as  this  action.  Its   statistics  and  capabilities  are  otherwise  replaced  by   those  of  the  new  form,  except  any  class  features  or   legendary  actions  of  that  form.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  dragon  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  dragon  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Detect.  The  dragon  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)   check.  
Tail  Attack.  The  dragon  makes  a  tail  attack.  
Wing  Attack  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  dragon  beats  its   wings.  Each  creature  within  10  feet  of  the  dragon   must  succeed  on  a  DC  22  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  15  (2d6  +  8)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be   knocked  prone.  The  dragon  can  then  fly  up  to  half  its   flying  speed.  
  
Young  Gold  Dragon  
Large  dragon,  lawful  good  
Armor  Class  18  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  178  (17d10  +  85)  
Speed  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   23  (+6)   14  (+2)   21  (+5)   16  (+3)   13  (+1)   20  (+5)  

Saving  Throws  Dex  +6,  Con  +9,  Wis  +5,  Cha  +9   Skills  Insight  +5,  Perception  +9,  Persuasion  +9,  Stealth  
+6   Damage  Immunities  fire   Senses  blindsight  30  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  19   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  10  (5,900  XP)        Amphibious.  The  dragon  can  breathe  air  and  water.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  makes  three  attacks:  one  with   its  bite  and  two  with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  17  (2d10  +  6)  piercing  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  13  (2d6  +  6)  slashing  damage.   Breath  Weapons  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  uses  one   of  the  following  breath  weapons.   Fire  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  fire  in  a  30-foot  cone.  
Each  creature  in  that  area  must  make  a  DC  17   Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  55  (10d10)  fire   damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on   a  successful  one.   Weakening  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  gas  in  a  30-foot   cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  succeed  on  a   DC  17  Strength  saving  throw  or  have  disadvantage   on  Strength-based  attack  rolls,  Strength  checks,  and   Strength  saving  throws  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can   repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its   turns,  ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.     
Gold  Dragon  Wyrmling  
Medium  dragon,  lawful  good  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  60  (8d8  +  24)   Speed  30  ft.,  fly  60  ft.,  swim  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   14  (+2)   17  (+3)   14  (+2)   11  (+0)   16  (+3)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +4,  Con  +5,  Wis  +2,  Cha  +5   Skills  Perception  +4,  Stealth  +4   Damage  Immunities  fire  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

303-]  {+5.1  

300+}  

Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive   Perception  14  
Languages  Draconic   Challenge  3  (700  XP)        Amphibious.  The  dragon  can  breathe  air  and  water.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  9  (1d10  +  4)  piercing  damage.   Breath  Weapons  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  uses  one   of  the  following  breath  weapons.   Fire  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  fire  in  a  15-foot  cone.  
Each  creature  in  that  area  must  make  a  DC  13   Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  22  (4d10)  fire  damage   on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on  a   successful  one.   Weakening  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  gas  in  a  15-foot   cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  succeed  on  a   DC  13  Strength  saving  throw  or  have  disadvantage   on  Strength-based  attack  rolls,  Strength  checks,  and   Strength  saving  throws  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can   repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its   turns,  ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.     
Silver Dragon
  
Ancient  Silver  Dragon  
Gargantuan  dragon,  lawful  good  
Armor  Class  22  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  487  (25d20  +  225)   Speed  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      30  (+10)   10  (+0)   29  (+9)   18  (+4)   15  (+2)   23  (+6)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +7,  Con  +16,  Wis  +9,  Cha  +13   Skills  Arcana  +11,  History  +11,  Perception  +16,  Stealth  
+7   Damage  Immunities  cold   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  26   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  23  (50,000  XP)       

Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  dragon  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  can  use  its  Frightful  Presence.   It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  two   with  its  claws.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +17  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  21  (2d10  +  10)  piercing  damage.  
Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +17  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  17  (2d6  +  10)  slashing  damage.  
Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +17  to  hit,  reach  20  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  19  (2d8  +  10)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  dragon's   choice  that  is  within  120  feet  of  the  dragon  and  aware   of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  21  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   become  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's  saving   throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  dragon's  Frightful  Presence   for  the  next  24  hours.  
Breath  Weapons  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  uses  one   of  the  following  breath  weapons.  
Cold  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  an  icy  blast  in  a  90- foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  make  a   DC  24  Constitution  saving  throw,  taking  67  (15d8)   cold  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Paralyzing  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  paralyzing  gas  in   a  90-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must   succeed  on  a  DC  24  Constitution  saving  throw  or  be   paralyzed  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat  the   saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  
Change  Shape.  The  dragon  magically  polymorphs  into   a  humanoid  or  beast  that  has  a  challenge  rating  no   higher  than  its  own,  or  back  into  its  true  form.  It   reverts  to  its  true  form  if  it  dies.  Any  equipment  it  is   wearing  or  carrying  is  absorbed  or  borne  by  the  new   form  (the  dragon's  choice).      In  a  new  form,  the  dragon  retains  its  alignment,  hit   points,  Hit  Dice,  ability  to  speak,  proficiencies,   Legendary  Resistance,  lair  actions,  and  Intelligence,   Wisdom,  and  Charisma  scores,  as  well  as  this  action.  Its   statistics  and  capabilities  are  otherwise  replaced  by   those  of  the  new  form,  except  any  class  features  or   legendary  actions  of  that  form.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

304-]  {+5.1  

301+}  

Legendary  Actions  
The  dragon  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  dragon  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.   Detect.  The  dragon  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)  
check.   Tail  Attack.  The  dragon  makes  a  tail  attack.   Wing  Attack  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  dragon  beats  its  
wings.  Each  creature  within  15  feet  of  the  dragon   must  succeed  on  a  DC  25  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  17  (2d6  +  10)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be   knocked  prone.  The  dragon  can  then  fly  up  to  half  its   flying  speed.     
Adult  Silver  Dragon  
Huge  dragon,  lawful  good  
Armor  Class  19  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  243  (18d12  +  126)   Speed  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      27  (+8)   10  (+0)   25  (+7)   16  (+3)   13  (+1)   21  (+5)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +5,  Con  +12,  Wis  +6,  Cha  +10   Skills  Arcana  +8,  History  +8,  Perception  +11,  Stealth  +5   Damage  Immunities  cold   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  21   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  16  (15,000  XP)        Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  dragon  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  can  use  its  Frightful  Presence.   It  then  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  two   with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +13  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  19  (2d10  +  8)  piercing  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +13  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  15  (2d6  +  8)  slashing  damage.   Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +13  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  17  (2d8  +  8)  bludgeoning  damage.  

Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  dragon's   choice  that  is  within  120  feet  of  the  dragon  and  aware   of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  18  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   become  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's  saving   throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  dragon's  Frightful  Presence   for  the  next  24  hours.  
Breath  Weapons  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  uses  one   of  the  following  breath  weapons.  
Cold  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  an  icy  blast  in  a  60- foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  make  a   DC  20  Constitution  saving  throw,  taking  58  (13d8)   cold  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Paralyzing  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  paralyzing  gas  in   a  60-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must   succeed  on  a  DC  20  Constitution  saving  throw  or  be   paralyzed  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat  the   saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  
Change  Shape.  The  dragon  magically  polymorphs  into   a  humanoid  or  beast  that  has  a  challenge  rating  no   higher  than  its  own,  or  back  into  its  true  form.  It   reverts  to  its  true  form  if  it  dies.  Any  equipment  it  is   wearing  or  carrying  is  absorbed  or  borne  by  the  new   form  (the  dragon's  choice).      In  a  new  form,  the  dragon  retains  its  alignment,  hit   points,  Hit  Dice,  ability  to  speak,  proficiencies,   Legendary  Resistance,  lair  actions,  and  Intelligence,   Wisdom,  and  Charisma  scores,  as  well  as  this  action.  Its   statistics  and  capabilities  are  otherwise  replaced  by   those  of  the  new  form,  except  any  class  features  or   legendary  actions  of  that  form.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  dragon  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  dragon  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Detect.  The  dragon  makes  a  Wisdom  (Perception)   check.  
Tail  Attack.  The  dragon  makes  a  tail  attack.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

305-]  {+5.1  

302+}  

Wing  Attack  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  dragon  beats  its   wings.  Each  creature  within  10  feet  of  the  dragon   must  succeed  on  a  DC  21  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  15  (2d6  +  8)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be   knocked  prone.  The  dragon  can  then  fly  up  to  half  its   flying  speed.  
  
Young  Silver  Dragon  
Large  dragon,  lawful  good  
Armor  Class  18  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  168  (16d10  +  80)   Speed  40  ft.,  fly  80  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      23  (+6)   10  (+0)   21  (+5)   14  (+2)   11  (+0)   19  (+4)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +4,  Con  +9,  Wis  +4,  Cha  +8   Skills  Arcana  +6,  History  +6,  Perception  +8,  Stealth  +4  
Damage  Immunities  cold   Senses  blindsight  30  ft.,  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  
Perception  18  
Languages  Common,  Draconic  
Challenge  9  (5,000  XP)  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  makes  three  attacks:  one  with   its  bite  and  two  with  its  claws.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  17  (2d10  +  6)  piercing  damage.  
Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  13  (2d6  +  6)  slashing  damage.   Breath  Weapons  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  uses  one   of  the  following  breath  weapons.  
Cold  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  an  icy  blast  in  a  30- foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  make  a   DC  17  Constitution  saving  throw,  taking  54  (12d8)   cold  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Paralyzing  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  paralyzing  gas  in   a  30-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must   succeed  on  a  DC  17  Constitution  saving  throw  or  be   paralyzed  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat  the   saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  
  

Silver  Dragon  Wyrmling  
Medium  dragon,  lawful  good  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  45  (6d8  +  18)   Speed  30  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   10  (+0)   17  (+3)   12  (+1)   11  (+0)   15  (+2)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +2,  Con  +5,  Wis  +2,  Cha  +4   Skills  Perception  +4,  Stealth  +2   Damage  Immunities  cold   Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  
Perception  14   Languages  Draconic   Challenge  2  (450  XP)  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  9  (1d10  +  4)  piercing  damage.   Breath  Weapons  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  uses  one   of  the  following  breath  weapons.   Cold  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  an  icy  blast  in  a  15-
foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  make  a   DC  13  Constitution  saving  throw,  taking  18  (4d8)  cold   damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on   a  successful  one.   Paralyzing  Breath.  The  dragon  exhales  paralyzing  gas  in   a  15-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must   succeed  on  a  DC  13  Constitution  saving  throw  or  be   paralyzed  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat  the   saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.     
Dragon  Turtle  
Gargantuan  dragon,  neutral  
Armor  Class  20  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  341  (22d20  +  110)   Speed  20  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      25  (+7)   10  (+0)   20  (+5)   10  (+0)   12  (+1)   12  (+1)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +6,  Con  +11,  Wis  +7   Damage  Resistances  fire   Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  11  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

306-]  {+5.1  

303+}  

Languages  Aquan,  Draconic   Challenge  17  (18,000  XP)       
Amphibious.  The  dragon  turtle  can  breathe  air  and   water.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dragon  turtle  makes  three  attacks:   one  with  its  bite  and  two  with  its  claws.  It  can  make   one  tail  attack  in  place  of  its  two  claw  attacks.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +13  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  26  (3d12  +  7)  piercing  damage.  
Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +13  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  16  (2d8  +  7)  slashing  damage.  
Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +13  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  26  (3d12  +  7)  bludgeoning  damage.  If  the   target  is  a  creature,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  20   Strength  saving  throw  or  be  pushed  up  to  10  feet  away   from  the  dragon  turtle  and  knocked  prone.  
Steam  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  dragon  turtle   exhales  scalding  steam  in  a  60-foot  cone.  Each  creature   in  that  area  must  make  a  DC  18  Constitution  saving   throw,  taking  52  (15d6)  fire  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or   half  as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.  Being   underwater  doesn't  grant  resistance  against  this   damage.  
  
Drider  
Large  monstrosity,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  19  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  123  (13d10  +  52)  
Speed  30  ft.,  climb  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      16  (+3)   16  (+3)   18  (+4)   13  (+1)   14  (+2)   12  (+1)  
Skills  Perception  +5,  Stealth  +9  
Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  15   Languages  Elvish,  Undercommon   Challenge  6  (2,300  XP)  
     Fey  Ancestry.  The  drider  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  being  charmed,  and  magic  can't  put  the   drider  to  sleep.  
Innate  Spellcasting.  The  drider's  innate  spellcasting   ability  is  Wisdom  (spell  save  DC  13).  The  drider  can  

innately  cast  the  following  spells,  requiring  no  material   components:   At  will:  dancing  lights   1/day  each:  darkness,  faerie  fire   Spider  Climb.  The  drider  can  climb  difficult  surfaces,   including  upside  down  on  ceilings,  without  needing  to   make  an  ability  check.   Sunlight  Sensitivity.  While  in  sunlight,  the  drider  has   disadvantage  on  attack  rolls,  as  well  as  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  sight.   Web  Walker.  The  drider  ignores  movement  restrictions   caused  by  webbing.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  drider  makes  three  attacks,  either   with  its  longsword  or  its  longbow.  It  can  replace  one  of   those  attacks  with  a  bite  attack.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  2  (1d4)  piercing  damage  plus  9  (2d8)   poison  damage.   Longsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  7  (1d8  +  3)  slashing  damage,  or  8  (1d10   +  3)  slashing  damage  if  used  with  two  hands.   Longbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  range   150/600  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  7  (1d8  +  3)  piercing   damage  plus  4  (1d8)  poison  damage.     
Dryad  
Medium  fey,  neutral  
Armor  Class  11  (16  with  barkskin)   Hit  Points  22  (5d8)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      10  (+0)   12  (+1)   11  (+0)   14  (+2)   15  (+2)   18  (+4)  
Skills  Perception  +4,  Stealth  +5   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  14   Languages  Elvish,  Sylvan   Challenge  1  (200  XP)        Innate  Spellcasting.  The  dryad's  innate  spellcasting   ability  is  Charisma  (spell  save  DC  14).  The  dryad  can   innately  cast  the  following  spells,  requiring  no  material   components:   At  will:  druidcraft  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

307-]  {+5.1  

304+}  

3/day  each:  entangle,  goodberry  
1/day  each:  barkskin,  pass  without  trace,  shillelagh  
Magic  Resistance.  The  dryad  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Speak  with  Beasts  and  Plants.  The  dryad  can   communicate  with  beasts  and  plants  as  if  they  shared  a   language.  
Tree  Stride.  Once  on  her  turn,  the  dryad  can  use  10   feet  of  her  movement  to  step  magically  into  one  living   tree  within  her  reach  and  emerge  from  a  second  living   tree  within  60  feet  of  the  first  tree,  appearing  in  an   unoccupied  space  within  5  feet  of  the  second  tree.   Both  trees  must  be  Large  or  bigger.  
Actions  
Club.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit  (+6  to  hit  with   shillelagh),  reach  5  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  2  (1d4)   bludgeoning  damage,  or  8  (1d8  +  4)  bludgeoning   damage  with  shillelagh.  
Fey  Charm.  The  dryad  targets  one  humanoid  or  beast   that  she  can  see  within  30  feet  of  her.  If  the  target  can   see  the  dryad,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  14  Wisdom   saving  throw  or  be  magically  charmed.  The  charmed   creature  regards  the  dryad  as  a  trusted  friend  to  be   heeded  and  protected.  Although  the  target  isn't  under   the  dryad's  control,  it  takes  the  dryad's  requests  or   actions  in  the  most  favorable  way  it  can.      Each  time  the  dryad  or  its  allies  do  anything  harmful   to  the  target,  it  can  repeat  the  saving  throw,  ending   the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  Otherwise,  the  effect   lasts  24  hours  or  until  the  dryad  dies,  is  on  a  different   plane  of  existence  from  the  target,  or  ends  the  effect   as  a  bonus  action.  If  a  target's  saving  throw  is   successful,  the  target  is  immune  to  the  dryad's  Fey   Charm  for  the  next  24  hours.      The  dryad  can  have  no  more  than  one  humanoid  and   up  to  three  beasts  charmed  at  a  time.  
  
Duergar  
Medium  humanoid  (dwarf),  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  16  (scale  mail,  shield)  
Hit  Points  26  (4d8  +  8)  
Speed  25  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   14  (+2)   11  (+0)   14  (+2)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)   9  (-1)  

Damage  Resistances  poison  
Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  10  
Languages  Dwarvish,  Undercommon  
Challenge  1  (200  XP)  
    
Duergar  Resilience.  The  duergar  has  advantage  on   saving  throws  against  poison,  spells,  and  illusions,  as   well  as  to  resist  being  charmed  or  paralyzed.  
Sunlight  Sensitivity.  While  in  sunlight,  the  duergar  has   disadvantage  on  attack  rolls,  as  well  as  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  sight.  
Actions  
Enlarge  (Recharges  after  a  Short  or  Long  Rest).  For  1   minute,  the  duergar  magically  increases  in  size,  along   with  anything  it  is  wearing  or  carrying.  While  enlarged,   the  duergar  is  Large,  doubles  its  damage  dice  on   Strength-based  weapon  attacks  (included  in  the   attacks),  and  makes  Strength  checks  and  Strength   saving  throws  with  advantage.  If  the  duergar  lacks  the   room  to  become  Large,  it  attains  the  maximum  size   possible  in  the  space  available.  
War  Pick.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  6  (1d8  +  2)  piercing  damage,  or  11  (2d8   +  2)  piercing  damage  while  enlarged.  
Javelin.  Melee  or  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,   reach  5  ft.  or  range  30/120  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +   2)  piercing  damage,  or  9  (2d6  +  2)  piercing  damage   while  enlarged.  
Invisibility  (Recharges  after  a  Short  or  Long  Rest).  The   duergar  magically  turns  invisible  until  it  attacks,  casts  a   spell,  or  uses  its  Enlarge,  or  until  its  concentration  is   broken,  up  to  1  hour  (as  if  concentrating  on  a  spell).   Any  equipment  the  duergar  wears  or  carries  is  invisible   with  it.  
  
Monsters (E)
  
Elementals
Air  Elemental  
Large  elemental,  neutral  
Armor  Class  15  
Hit  Points  90  (12d10  +  24)  
Speed  0  ft.,  fly  90  ft.  (hover)  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

308-]  {+5.1  

305+}  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      14  (+2)   20  (+5)   14  (+2)   6  (-2)   10  (+0)   6  (-2)  
Damage  Resistances  lightning,  thunder;  bludgeoning,   piercing,  and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  
Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  exhaustion,  grappled,  paralyzed,  
petrified,  poisoned,  prone,  restrained,  unconscious   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  Auran   Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)        Air  Form.  The  elemental  can  enter  a  hostile  creature's   space  and  stop  there.  It  can  move  through  a  space  as   narrow  as  1  inch  wide  without  squeezing.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  elemental  makes  two  slam  attacks.   Slam.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  14  (2d8  +  5)  bludgeoning  damage.   Whirlwind  (Recharge  4­6).  Each  creature  in  the   elemental's  space  must  make  a  DC  13  Strength  saving   throw.  On  a  failure,  a  target  takes  15  (3d8  +  2)   bludgeoning  damage  and  is  flung  up  20  feet  away  from   the  elemental  in  a  random  direction  and  knocked   prone.  If  a  thrown  target  strikes  an  object,  such  as  a   wall  or  floor,  the  target  takes  3  (1d6)  bludgeoning   damage  for  every  10  feet  it  was  thrown.  If  the  target  is   thrown  at  another  creature,  that  creature  must   succeed  on  a  DC  13  Dexterity  saving  throw  or  take  the   same  damage  and  be  knocked  prone.      If  the  saving  throw  is  successful,  the  target  takes  half   the  bludgeoning  damage  and  isn't  flung  away  or   knocked  prone.     
Earth  Elemental  
Large  elemental,  neutral  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  126  (12d10  +  60)   Speed  30  ft.,  burrow  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      20  (+5)   8  (-1)   20  (+5)   5  (-3)   10  (+0)   5  (-3)  
Damage  Vulnerabilities  thunder   Damage  Resistances  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and  
slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  

Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  exhaustion,  paralyzed,  petrified,  
poisoned,  unconscious   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  tremorsense  60  ft.,  passive  
Perception  10   Languages  Terran   Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)        Earth  Glide.  The  elemental  can  burrow  through   nonmagical,  unworked  earth  and  stone.  While  doing  so,   the  elemental  doesn't  disturb  the  material  it  moves   through.   Siege  Monster.  The  elemental  deals  double  damage  to   objects  and  structures.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  elemental  makes  two  slam  attacks.   Slam.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  14  (2d8  +  5)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Fire  Elemental  
Large  elemental,  neutral  
Armor  Class  13   Hit  Points  102  (12d10  +  36)   Speed  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      10  (+0)   17  (+3)   16  (+3)   6  (-2)   10  (+0)   7  (-2)  
Damage  Resistances  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and   slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  
Damage  Immunities  fire,  poison   Condition  Immunities  exhaustion,  grappled,  paralyzed,  
petrified,  poisoned,  prone,  restrained,  unconscious   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  Ignan   Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)        Fire  Form.  The  elemental  can  move  through  a  space  as   narrow  as  1  inch  wide  without  squeezing.  A  creature   that  touches  the  elemental  or  hits  it  with  a  melee   attack  while  within  5  feet  of  it  takes  5  (1d10)  fire   damage.  In  addition,  the  elemental  can  enter  a  hostile   creature's  space  and  stop  there.  The  first  time  it  enters   a  creature's  space  on  a  turn,  that  creature  takes  5   (1d10)  fire  damage  and  catches  fire;  until  someone  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

309-]  {+5.1  

306+}  

takes  an  action  to  douse  the  fire,  the  creature  takes  5   (1d10)  fire  damage  at  the  start  of  each  of  its  turns.   Illumination.  The  elemental  sheds  bright  light  in  a  30- foot  radius  and  dim  light  in  an  additional  30  feet.   Water  Susceptibility.  For  every  5  feet  the  elemental   moves  in  water,  or  for  every  gallon  of  water  splashed   on  it,  it  takes  1  cold  damage.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  elemental  makes  two  touch  attacks.   Touch.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  10  (2d6  +  3)  fire  damage.  If  the  target  is  a   creature  or  a  flammable  object,  it  ignites.  Until  a   creature  takes  an  action  to  douse  the  fire,  the  target   takes  5  (1d10)  fire  damage  at  the  start  of  each  of  its   turns.     
Water  Elemental  
Large  elemental,  neutral  
Armor  Class  14  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  114  (12d10  +  48)   Speed  30  ft.,  swim  90  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   14  (+2)   18  (+4)   5  (-3)   10  (+0)   8  (-1)  
Damage  Resistances  acid;  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and   slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  
Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  exhaustion,  grappled,  paralyzed,  
petrified,  poisoned,  prone,  restrained,  unconscious   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  Aquan   Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)        Water  Form.  The  elemental  can  enter  a  hostile   creature's  space  and  stop  there.  It  can  move  through  a   space  as  narrow  as  1  inch  wide  without  squeezing.   Freeze.  If  the  elemental  takes  cold  damage,  it  partially   freezes;  its  speed  is  reduced  by  20  feet  until  the  end  of   its  next  turn.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  elemental  makes  two  slam  attacks.   Slam.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  13  (2d8  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.  

Whelm  (Recharge  4­6).  Each  creature  in  the   elemental's  space  must  make  a  DC  15  Strength  saving   throw.  On  a  failure,  a  target  takes  13  (2d8  +  4)   bludgeoning  damage.  If  it  is  Large  or  smaller,  it  is  also   grappled  (escape  DC  14).  Until  this  grapple  ends,  the   target  is  restrained  and  unable  to  breathe  unless  it  can   breathe  water.  If  the  saving  throw  is  successful,  the   target  is  pushed  out  of  the  elemental's  space.      The  elemental  can  grapple  one  Large  creature  or  up   to  two  Medium  or  smaller  creatures  at  one  time.  At  the   start  of  each  of  the  elemental's  turns,  each  target   grappled  by  it  takes  13  (2d8  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.   A  creature  within  5  feet  of  the  elemental  can  pull  a   creature  or  object  out  of  it  by  taking  an  action  to  make   a  DC  14  Strength  and  succeeding.  
  
Elf,  Drow  
Medium  humanoid  (elf),  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  15  (chain  shirt)  
Hit  Points  13  (3d8)  
Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   10  (+0)   14  (+2)   10  (+0)   11  (+0)   11  (+0)   12  (+1)  
Skills  Perception  +2,  Stealth  +4  
Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  12  
Languages  Elvish,  Undercommon  
Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)  
    
Fey  Ancestry.  The  drow  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  being  charmed,  and  magic  can't  put  the   drow  to  sleep.  
Innate  Spellcasting.  The  drow's  spellcasting  ability  is   Charisma  (spell  save  DC  11).  It  can  innately  cast  the   following  spells,  requiring  no  material  components:  
At  will:  dancing  lights  
1/day  each:  darkness,  faerie  fire  
Sunlight  Sensitivity.  While  in  sunlight,  the  drow  has   disadvantage  on  attack  rolls,  as  well  as  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  sight.  
Actions  
Shortsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing  damage.  
Hand  Crossbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,   range  30/120  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

310-]  {+5.1  

307+}  

damage,  and  the  target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  13   Constitution  saving  throw  or  be  poisoned  for  1  hour.  If   the  saving  throw  fails  by  5  or  more,  the  target  is  also   unconscious  while  poisoned  in  this  way.  The  target   wakes  up  if  it  takes  damage  or  if  another  creature   takes  an  action  to  shake  it  awake.  
  
Ettercap  
Medium  monstrosity,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  44  (8d8  +  8)  
Speed  30  ft.,  climb  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   14  (+2)   15  (+2)   13  (+1)   7  (-2)   12  (+1)   8  (-1)  
Skills  Perception  +3,  Stealth  +4,  Survival  +3  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  13  
Languages  --  
Challenge  2  (450  XP)  
    
Spider  Climb.  The  ettercap  can  climb  difficult  surfaces,   including  upside  down  on  ceilings,  without  needing  to   make  an  ability  check.  
Web  Sense.  While  in  contact  with  a  web,  the  ettercap   knows  the  exact  location  of  any  other  creature  in   contact  with  the  same  web.  
Web  Walker.  The  ettercap  ignores  movement   restrictions  caused  by  webbing.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  ettercap  makes  two  attacks:  one  with   its  bite  and  one  with  its  claws.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  6  (1d8  +  2)  piercing  damage  plus  4  (1d8)   poison  damage.  The  target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  11   Constitution  saving  throw  or  be  poisoned  for  1  minute.   The  creature  can  repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of   each  of  its  turns,  ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a   success.  
Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (2d4  +  2)  slashing  damage.  
Web  (Recharge  5­6).  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,   range  30/60  ft.,  one  Large  or  smaller  creature.  Hit:  The   creature  is  restrained  by  webbing.  As  an  action,  the   restrained  creature  can  make  a  DC  11  Strength  check,   escaping  from  the  webbing  on  a  success.  The  effect  

also  ends  if  the  webbing  is  destroyed.  The  webbing  has   AC  10,  5  hit  points,  vulnerability  to  fire  damage,  and   immunity  to  bludgeoning,  poison,  and  psychic  damage.     
Ettin  
Large  giant,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  12  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  85  (10d10  +  30)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      21  (+5)   8  (-1)   17  (+3)   6  (-2)   10  (+0)   8  (-1)  
Skills  Perception  +4   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  14   Languages  Giant,  Orc   Challenge  4  (1,100  XP)        Two  Heads.  The  ettin  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  and  on  saving  throws  against  being   blinded,  charmed,  deafened,  frightened,  stunned,  and   knocked  unconscious.   Wakeful.  When  one  of  the  ettin's  heads  is  asleep,  its   other  head  is  awake.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  ettin  makes  two  attacks:  one  with  its   battleaxe  and  one  with  its  morningstar.   Battleaxe.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  14  (2d8  +  5)  slashing  damage.   Morningstar.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  14  (2d8  +  5)  piercing  damage.     
[-Monsters (F)
  
Fungi
Shrieker  
Medium  plant,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  5   Hit  Points  13  (3d8)   Speed  0  ft.-]     

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

311-]  {+5.1  

308  

Monsters (F)
  
Fungi
Shrieker  
Medium  plant,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  5   Hit  Points  13  (3d8)   Speed  0  ft.+}  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      1  (-5)   1  (-5)   10  (+0)   1  (-5)   3  (-4)   1  (-5)  
Condition  Immunities  blinded,  deafened,  frightened   Senses  blindsight  30  ft.  (blind  beyond  this  radius),  
passive  Perception  6   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)        False  Appearance.  While  the  shrieker  remains   motionless,  it  is  indistinguishable  from  an  ordinary   fungus.  
Reactions  
Shriek.  When  bright  light  or  a  creature  is  within  30  feet   of  the  shrieker,  it  emits  a  shriek  audible  within  300  feet   of  it.  The  shrieker  continues  to  shriek  until  the   disturbance  moves  out  of  range  and  for  1d4  of  the   shrieker's  turns  afterward.     
Violet  Fungus  
Medium  plant,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  5   Hit  Points  18  (4d8)   Speed  5  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      3  (-4)   1  (-5)   10  (+0)   1  (-5)   3  (-4)   1  (-5)  
Condition  Immunities  blinded,  deafened,  frightened   Senses  blindsight  30  ft.  (blind  beyond  this  radius),  
passive  Perception  6   Languages  --   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)       

False  Appearance.  While  the  violet  fungus  remains   motionless,  it  is  indistinguishable  from  an  ordinary   fungus.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  fungus  makes  1d4  Rotting  Touch   attacks.   Rotting  Touch.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit,  reach   10  ft.,  one  creature.  Hit:  4  (1d8)  necrotic  damage.     
Monsters (G)
  
Gargoyle  
Medium  elemental,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  15  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  52  (7d8  +  21)   Speed  30  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   11  (+0)   16  (+3)   6  (-2)   11  (+0)   7  (-2)  
Damage  Resistances  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and   slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  that  aren't   adamantine  
Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  exhaustion,  petrified,  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  Terran   Challenge  2  (450  XP)        False  Appearance.  While  the  gargoyle  remains   motionless,  it  is  indistinguishable  from  an  inanimate   statue.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  gargoyle  makes  two  attacks:  one  with   its  bite  and  one  with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing  damage.   Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  slashing  damage.     

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

309+}  

Genies
Djinni  
Large  elemental,  chaotic  good  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  161  (14d10  +  84)   Speed  30  ft.,  fly  90  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      21  (+5)   15  (+2)   22  (+6)   15  (+2)   16  (+3)   20  (+5)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +6,  Wis  +7,  Cha  +9   Damage  Immunities  lightning,  thunder  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

312-]   Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  13   Languages  Auran   Challenge  11  (7,200  XP)        Elemental  Demise.  If  the  djinni  dies,  its  body   disintegrates  into  a  warm  breeze,  leaving  behind  only   equipment  the  djinni  was  wearing  or  carrying.   Innate  Spellcasting.  The  djinni's  innate  spellcasting   ability  is  Charisma  (spell  save  DC  17,  +9  to  hit  with  spell   attacks).  It  can  innately  cast  the  following  spells,   requiring  no  material  components:   At  will:  detect  evil  and  good,  detect  magic,  
thunderwave   3/day  each:  create  food  and  water  (can  create  wine  
instead  of  water),  tongues,  wind  walk   1/day  each:  conjure  elemental  (air  elemental  only),  
creation,  gaseous  form,  invisibility,  major  image,   plane  shift  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  djinni  makes  three  scimitar  attacks.   Scimitar.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  12  (2d6  +  5)  slashing  damage  plus  3   (1d6)  lightning  or  thunder  damage  (djinni's  choice).   Create  Whirlwind.  A  5-foot-radius,  30-foot-tall  cylinder   of  swirling  air  magically  forms  on  a  point  the  djinni  can   see  within  120  feet  of  it.  The  whirlwind  lasts  as  long  as   the  djinni  maintains  concentration  (as  if  concentrating   on  a  spell).  Any  creature  but  the  djinni  that  enters  the   whirlwind  must  succeed  on  a  DC  18  Strength  saving   throw  or  be  restrained  by  it.  The  djinni  can  move  the   whirlwind  up  to  60  feet  as  an  action,  and  creatures   restrained  by  the  whirlwind  move  with  it.  The   whirlwind  ends  if  the  djinni  loses  sight  of  it.  

   A  creature  can  use  its  action  to  free  a  creature   restrained  by  the  whirlwind,  including  itself,  by   succeeding  on  a  DC  18  Strength  check.  If  the  check   succeeds,  the  creature  is  no  longer  restrained  and   moves  to  the  nearest  space  outside  the  whirlwind.     
Efreeti  
Large  elemental,  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  200  (16d10  +  112)   Speed  40  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      22  (+6)   12  (+1)   24  (+7)   16  (+3)   15  (+2)   16  (+3)  
Saving  Throws  Int  +7,  Wis  +6,  Cha  +7   Damage  Immunities  fire   Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  12   Languages  Ignan   Challenge  11  (7,200  XP)        Elemental  Demise.  If  the  efreeti  dies,  its  body   disintegrates  in  a  flash  of  fire  and  puff  of  smoke,   leaving  behind  only  equipment  the  efreeti  was  wearing   or  carrying.   Innate  Spellcasting.  The  efreeti's  innate  spellcasting   ability  is  Charisma  (spell  save  DC  15,  +7  to  hit  with  spell   attacks).  It  can  innately  cast  the  following  spells,   requiring  no  material  components:   At  will:  detect  magic   3/day:  enlarge/reduce,  tongues   1/day  each:  conjure  elemental  (fire  elemental  only),  
gaseous  form,  invisibility,  major  image,  plane  shift,   wall  of  fire  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  efreeti  makes  two  scimitar  attacks  or   uses  its  Hurl  Flame  twice.   Scimitar.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  13  (2d6  +  6)  slashing  damage  plus  7   (2d6)  fire  damage.   Hurl  Flame.  Ranged  Spell  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  range  120   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  17  (5d6)  fire  damage.     

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

310+}  

Ghost  
Medium  undead,  any  alignment  
Armor  Class  11  
Hit  Points  45  (10d8)  
Speed  0  ft.,  fly  40  ft.  (hover)  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   7  (-2)   13  (+1)   10  (+0)   10  (+0)   12  (+1)   17  (+3)  
Damage  Resistances  acid,  fire,  lightning,  thunder;   bludgeoning,  piercing,  and  slashing  from  nonmagical   attacks  
Damage  Immunities  cold,  necrotic,  poison  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

313-]  
Condition  Immunities  charmed,  exhaustion,  frightened,   grappled,  paralyzed,  petrified,  poisoned,  prone,   restrained  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  11  
Languages  any  languages  it  knew  in  life  
Challenge  4  (1,100  XP)  
    
Ethereal  Sight.  The  ghost  can  see  60  feet  into  the   Ethereal  Plane  when  it  is  on  the  Material  Plane,  and   vice  versa.  
Incorporeal  Movement.  The  ghost  can  move  through   other  creatures  and  objects  as  if  they  were  difficult   terrain.  It  takes  5  (1d10)  force  damage  if  it  ends  its  turn   inside  an  object.  
Actions  
Withering  Touch.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,   reach  5  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  17  (4d6  +  3)  necrotic   damage.  
Etherealness.  The  ghost  enters  the  Ethereal  Plane  from   the  Material  Plane,  or  vice  versa.  It  is  visible  on  the   Material  Plane  while  it  is  in  the  Border  Ethereal,  and   vice  versa,  yet  it  can't  affect  or  be  affected  by  anything   on  the  other  plane.  
Horrifying  Visage.  Each  non-undead  creature  within  60   feet  of  the  ghost  that  can  see  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC   13  Wisdom  saving  throw  or  be  frightened  for  1  minute.   If  the  save  fails  by  5  or  more,  the  target  also  ages  1d4  ×   10  years.  A  frightened  target  can  repeat  the  saving   throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending  the   frightened  condition  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  target's   saving  throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   target  is  immune  to  this  ghost's  Horrifying  Visage  for   the  next  24  hours.  The  aging  effect  can  be  reversed  

with  a  greater  restoration  spell,  but  only  within  24   hours  of  it  occurring.  
Possession  (Recharge  6).  One  humanoid  that  the  ghost   can  see  within  5  feet  of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  13   Charisma  saving  throw  or  be  possessed  by  the  ghost;   the  ghost  then  disappears,  and  the  target  is   incapacitated  and  loses  control  of  its  body.  The  ghost   now  controls  the  body  but  doesn't  deprive  the  target   of  awareness.  The  ghost  can't  be  targeted  by  any   attack,  spell,  or  other  effect,  except  ones  that  turn   undead,  and  it  retains  its  alignment,  Intelligence,   Wisdom,  Charisma,  and  immunity  to  being  charmed   and  frightened.  It  otherwise  uses  the  possessed   target's  statistics,  but  doesn't  gain  access  to  the   target's  knowledge,  class  features,  or  proficiencies.      The  possession  lasts  until  the  body  drops  to  0  hit   points,  the  ghost  ends  it  as  a  bonus  action,  or  the  ghost   is  turned  or  forced  out  by  an  effect  like  the  dispel  evil   and  good  spell.  When  the  possession  ends,  the  ghost   reappears  in  an  unoccupied  space  within  5  feet  of  the   body.  The  target  is  immune  to  this  ghost's  Possession   for  24  hours  after  succeeding  on  the  saving  throw  or   after  the  possession  ends.  
  
Ghouls
Ghast  
Medium  undead,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  13  
Hit  Points  36  (8d8)  
Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   16  (+3)   17  (+3)   10  (+0)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)   8  (-1)  
Damage  Resistances  necrotic  
Damage  Immunities  poison  
Condition  Immunities  charmed,  exhaustion,  poisoned  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10  
Languages  Common  
Challenge  2  (450  XP)  
    
Stench.  Any  creature  that  starts  its  turn  within  5  feet  of   the  ghast  must  succeed  on  a  DC  10  Constitution  saving   throw  or  be  poisoned  until  the  start  of  its  next  turn.  On   a  successful  saving  throw,  the  creature  is  immune  to   the  ghast's  Stench  for  24  hours.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

311+}  

Turning  Defiance.  The  ghast  and  any  ghouls  within  30   feet  of  it  have  advantage  on  saving  throws  against   effects  that  turn  undead.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  12  (2d8  +  3)  piercing  damage.   Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  10  (2d6  +  3)  slashing  damage.  If  the  target  is   a  creature  other  than  an  undead,  it  must  succeed  on  a   DC  10  Constitution  saving  throw  or  be  paralyzed  for  1   minute.  The  target  can  repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the   end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a   success.  
  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

314-]     
Ghoul  
Medium  undead,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  22  (5d8)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      13  (+1)   15  (+2)   10  (+0)   7  (-2)   10  (+0)   6  (-2)  
Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  exhaustion,  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  Common   Challenge  1  (200  XP)  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  9  (2d6  +  2)  piercing  damage.   Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (2d4  +  2)  slashing  damage.  If  the  target  is   a  creature  other  than  an  elf  or  undead,  it  must  succeed   on  a  DC  10  Constitution  saving  throw  or  be  paralyzed   for  1  minute.  The  target  can  repeat  the  saving  throw  at   the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending  the  effect  on  itself   on  a  success.     
Giants
Cloud  Giant  
Huge  giant,  neutral  good  (50%)  or  neutral  evil  (50%)  
Armor  Class  14  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  200  (16d12  +  96)  

Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      27  (+8)   10  (+0)   22  (+6)   12  (+1)   16  (+3)   16  (+3)  
Saving  Throws  Con  +10,  Wis  +7,  Cha  +7   Skills  Insight  +7,  Perception  +7   Senses  passive  Perception  17   Languages  Common,  Giant   Challenge  9  (5,000  XP)        Keen  Smell.  The  giant  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  smell.   Innate  Spellcasting.  The  giant's  innate  spellcasting   ability  is  Charisma.  It  can  innately  cast  the  following   spells,  requiring  no  material  components:   At  will:  detect  magic,  fog  cloud,  light   3/day  each:  feather  fall,  fly,  misty  step,  telekinesis   1/day  each:  control  weather,  gaseous  form    
Actions   Multiattack.  The  giant  makes  two  morningstar  attacks.   Morningstar.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +12  to  hit,  reach   10  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  21  (3d8  +  8)  piercing  damage.   Rock.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +12  to  hit,  range  60/240   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  30  (4d10  +  8)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Fire  Giant  
Huge  giant,  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  18  (plate)   Hit  Points  162  (13d12  +  78)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      25  (+7)   9  (-1)   23  (+6)   10  (+0)   14  (+2)   13  (+1)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +3,  Con  +10,  Cha  +5   Skills  Athletics  +11,  Perception  +6   Damage  Immunities  fire   Senses  passive  Perception  16   Languages  Giant   Challenge  9  (5,000  XP)  
Actions   Multiattack.  The  giant  makes  two  greatsword  attacks.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

312+}  

Greatsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +11  to  hit,  reach   10  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  28  (6d6  +  7)  slashing  damage.   Rock.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +11  to  hit,  range  60/240   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  29  (4d10  +  7)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Frost  Giant  
Huge  giant,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  15  (patchwork  armor)   Hit  Points  138  (12d12  +  60)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      23  (+6)   9  (-1)   21  (+5)   9  (-1)   10  (+0)   12  (+1)  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

315-]  
Saving  Throws  Con  +8,  Wis  +3,  Cha  +4   Skills  Athletics  +9,  Perception  +3   Damage  Immunities  cold   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  Giant   Challenge  8  (3,900  XP)  
Actions   Multiattack.  The  giant  makes  two  greataxe  attacks.   Greataxe.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  25  (3d12  +  6)  slashing  damage.   Rock.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  range  60/240   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  28  (4d10  +  6)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Hill  Giant  
Huge  giant,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  105  (10d12  +  40)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      21  (+5)   8  (-1)   19  (+4)   5  (-3)   9  (-1)   6  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +2   Senses  passive  Perception  12   Languages  Giant   Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)  
Actions   Multiattack.  The  giant  makes  two  greatclub  attacks.  

Greatclub.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  10   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  18  (3d8  +  5)  bludgeoning  damage.   Rock.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  range  60/240   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  21  (3d10  +  5)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Stone  Giant  
Huge  giant,  neutral  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  126  (11d12  +  55)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      23  (+6)   15  (+2)   20  (+5)   10  (+0)   12  (+1)   9  (-1)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +5,  Con  +8,  Wis  +4   Skills  Athletics  +12,  Perception  +4   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  14   Languages  Giant   Challenge  7  (2,900  XP)        Stone  Camouflage.  The  giant  has  advantage  on   Dexterity  (Stealth)  checks  made  to  hide  in  rocky  terrain.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  giant  makes  two  greatclub  attacks.   Greatclub.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  reach  15   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  19  (3d8  +  6)  bludgeoning  damage.   Rock.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  range  60/240   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  28  (4d10  +  6)  bludgeoning  damage.   If  the  target  is  a  creature,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  17   Strength  saving  throw  or  be  knocked  prone.  
Reactions  
Rock  Catching.  If  a  rock  or  similar  object  is  hurled  at   the  giant,  the  giant  can,  with  a  successful  DC  10   Dexterity  saving  throw,  catch  the  missile  and  take  no   bludgeoning  damage  from  it.     
Storm  Giant  
Huge  giant,  chaotic  good  
Armor  Class  16  (scale  mail)   Hit  Points  230  (20d12  +  100)   Speed  50  ft.,  swim  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      29  (+9)   14  (+2)   20  (+5)   16  (+3)   18  (+4)   18  (+4)  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

313+}  

Saving  Throws  Str  +14,  Con  +10,  Wis  +9,  Cha  +9   Skills  Arcana  +8,  Athletics  +14,  History  +8,  Perception  
+9   Damage  Resistances  cold   Damage  Immunities  lightning,  thunder   Senses  passive  Perception  19   Languages  Common,  Giant   Challenge  13  (10,000  XP)        Amphibious.  The  giant  can  breathe  air  and  water.   Innate  Spellcasting.  The  giant's  innate  spellcasting   ability  is  Charisma  (spell  save  DC  17).  It  can  innately  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

316-]   cast  the  following  spells,  requiring  no  material   components:   At  will:  detect  magic,  feather  fall,  levitate,  light   3/day  each:  control  weather,  water  breathing  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  giant  makes  two  greatsword  attacks.   Greatsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +14  to  hit,  reach   10  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  30  (6d6  +  9)  slashing  damage.   Rock.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +14  to  hit,  range  60/240   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  35  (4d12  +  9)  bludgeoning  damage.   Lightning  Strike  (Recharge  5­6).  The  giant  hurls  a   magical  lightning  bolt  at  a  point  it  can  see  within  500   feet  of  it.  Each  creature  within  10  feet  of  that  point   must  make  a  DC  17  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  54   (12d8)  lightning  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as   much  damage  on  a  successful  one.     
Gibbering  Mouther  
Medium  aberration,  neutral  
Armor  Class  9   Hit  Points  67  (9d8  +  27)   Speed  10  ft.,  swim  10  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      10  (+0)   8  (-1)   16  (+3)   3  (-4)   10  (+0)   6  (-2)  
Condition  Immunities  prone   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  2  (450  XP)       

Aberrant  Ground.  The  ground  in  a  10-foot  radius   around  the  mouther  is  doughlike  difficult  terrain.  Each   creature  that  starts  its  turn  in  that  area  must  succeed   on  a  DC  10  Strength  saving  throw  or  have  its  speed   reduced  to  0  until  the  start  of  its  next  turn.  
Gibbering.  The  mouther  babbles  incoherently  while  it   can  see  any  creature  and  isn't  incapacitated.  Each   creature  that  starts  its  turn  within  20  feet  of  the   mouther  and  can  hear  the  gibbering  must  succeed  on  a   DC  10  Wisdom  saving  throw.  On  a  failure,  the  creature   can't  take  reactions  until  the  start  of  its  next  turn  and   rolls  a  d8  to  determine  what  it  does  during  its  turn.  On   a  1  to  4,  the  creature  does  nothing.  On  a  5  or  6,  the   creature  takes  no  action  or  bonus  action  and  uses  all  its   movement  to  move  in  a  randomly  determined   direction.  On  a  7  or  8,  the  creature  makes  a  melee   attack  against  a  randomly  determined  creature  within   its  reach  or  does  nothing  if  it  can't  make  such  an  attack.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  gibbering  mouther  makes  one  bite   attack  and,  if  it  can,  uses  its  Blinding  Spittle.  
Bites.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  17  (5d6)  piercing  damage.  If  the  target  is   Medium  or  smaller,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  10   Strength  saving  throw  or  be  knocked  prone.  If  the   target  is  killed  by  this  damage,  it  is  absorbed  into  the   mouther.  
Blinding  Spittle  (Recharge  5­6).  The  mouther  spits  a   chemical  glob  at  a  point  it  can  see  within  15  feet  of  it.   The  glob  explodes  in  a  blinding  flash  of  light  on  impact.   Each  creature  within  5  feet  of  the  flash  must  succeed   on  a  DC  13  Dexterity  saving  throw  or  be  blinded  until   the  end  of  the  mouther's  next  turn.  
  
Gnoll  
Medium  humanoid  (gnoll),  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  15  (hide  armor,  shield)  
Hit  Points  22  (5d8)  
Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   14  (+2)   12  (+1)   11  (+0)   6  (-2)   10  (+0)   7  (-2)  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10  
Languages  Gnoll  
Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)  
    

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

314+}  

Rampage.  When  the  gnoll  reduces  a  creature  to  0  hit   points  with  a  melee  attack  on  its  turn,  the  gnoll  can   take  a  bonus  action  to  move  up  to  half  its  speed  and   make  a  bite  attack.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  4  (1d4  +  2)  piercing  damage.   Spear.  Melee  or  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,   reach  5  ft.  or  range  20/60  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +   2)  piercing  damage,  or  6  (1d8  +  2)  piercing  damage  if   used  with  two  hands  to  make  a  melee  attack.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

317-]   Longbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  range   150/600  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d8  +  1)  piercing   damage.     
Gnome,  Deep  (Svirfneblin)  
Small  humanoid  (gnome),  neutral  good  
Armor  Class  15  (chain  shirt)   Hit  Points  16  (3d6  +  6)   Speed  20  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   14  (+2)   14  (+2)   12  (+1)   10  (+0)   9  (-1)  
Skills  Investigation  +3,  Perception  +2,  Stealth  +4   Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  12   Languages  Gnomish,  Terran,  Undercommon   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)      Stone  Camouflage.  The  gnome  has  advantage  on   Dexterity  (Stealth)  checks  made  to  hide  in  rocky  terrain.   Gnome  Cunning.  The  gnome  has  advantage  on   Intelligence,  Wisdom,  and  Charisma  saving  throws   against  magic.   Innate  Spellcasting.  The  gnome's  innate  spellcasting   ability  is  Intelligence  (spell  save  DC  11).  It  can  innately   cast  the  following  spells,  requiring  no  material   components:   At  will:  nondetection  (self  only)   1/day  each:  blindness/deafness,  blur,  disguise  self  
Actions  
War  Pick.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  6  (1d8  +  2)  piercing  damage.  

Poisoned  Dart.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,   range  30/120  ft.,  one  creature.  Hit:  4  (1d4  +  2)  piercing   damage,  and  the  target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  12   Constitution  saving  throw  or  be  poisoned  for  1  minute.   The  target  can  repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of   each  of  its  turns,  ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a   success.     
Goblin  
Small  humanoid  (goblinoid),  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  15  (leather  armor,  shield)   Hit  Points  7  (2d6)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      8  (-1)   14  (+2)   10  (+0)   10  (+0)   8  (-1)   8  (-1)  
Skills  Stealth  +6   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  9   Languages  Common,  Goblin   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)        Nimble  Escape.  The  goblin  can  take  the  Disengage  or   Hide  action  as  a  bonus  action  on  each  of  its  turns.  
Actions  
Scimitar.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  slashing  damage.   Shortbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  range   80/320  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing  damage.     
Golems
Clay  Golem  
Large  construct,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  14  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  133  (14d10  +  56)   Speed  20  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      20  (+5)   9  (-1)   18  (+4)   3  (-4)   8  (-1)   1  (-5)  
Damage  Immunities  acid,  poison,  psychic;  bludgeoning,   piercing,  and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  that   aren't  adamantine  
Condition  Immunities  charmed,  exhaustion,  frightened,   paralyzed,  petrified,  poisoned  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

315+}  

Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  9  
Languages  understands  the  languages  of  its  creator  but   can't  speak  
Challenge  9  (5,000  XP)  
    
Acid  Absorption.  Whenever  the  golem  is  subjected  to   acid  damage,  it  takes  no  damage  and  instead  regains  a   number  of  hit  points  equal  to  the  acid  damage  dealt.  
Berserk.  Whenever  the  golem  starts  its  turn  with  60  hit   points  or  fewer,  roll  a  d6.  On  a  6,  the  golem  goes   berserk.  On  each  of  its  turns  while  berserk,  the  golem   attacks  the  nearest  creature  it  can  see.  If  no  creature  is  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

318-]   near  enough  to  move  to  and  attack,  the  golem  attacks   an  object,  with  preference  for  an  object  smaller  than   itself.  Once  the  golem  goes  berserk,  it  continues  to  do   so  until  it  is  destroyed  or  regains  all  its  hit  points.  
Immutable  Form.  The  golem  is  immune  to  any  spell  or   effect  that  would  alter  its  form.  
Magic  Resistance.  The  golem  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Magic  Weapons.  The  golem's  weapon  attacks  are   magical.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  golem  makes  two  slam  attacks.  
Slam.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  16  (2d10  +  5)  bludgeoning  damage.  If  the   target  is  a  creature,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  15   Constitution  saving  throw  or  have  its  hit  point   maximum  reduced  by  an  amount  equal  to  the  damage   taken.  The  target  dies  if  this  attack  reduces  its  hit  point   maximum  to  0.  The  reduction  lasts  until  removed  by   the  greater  restoration  spell  or  other  magic.  
Haste  (Recharge  5­6).  Until  the  end  of  its  next  turn,   the  golem  magically  gains  a  +2  bonus  to  its  AC,  has   advantage  on  Dexterity  saving  throws,  and  can  use  its   slam  attack  as  a  bonus  action.  
  
Flesh  Golem  
Medium  construct,  neutral  
Armor  Class  9  
Hit  Points  93  (11d8  +  44)  
Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   19  (+4)   9  (-1)   18  (+4)   6  (-2)   10  (+0)   5  (-3)  

Damage  Immunities  lightning,  poison;  bludgeoning,   piercing,  and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  that   aren't  adamantine  
Condition  Immunities  charmed,  exhaustion,  frightened,   paralyzed,  petrified,  poisoned  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10  
Languages  understands  the  languages  of  its  creator  but   can't  speak  
Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)  
    
Berserk.  Whenever  the  golem  starts  its  turn  with  40  hit   points  or  fewer,  roll  a  d6.  On  a  6,  the  golem  goes   berserk.  On  each  of  its  turns  while  berserk,  the  golem   attacks  the  nearest  creature  it  can  see.  If  no  creature  is   near  enough  to  move  to  and  attack,  the  golem  attacks   an  object,  with  preference  for  an  object  smaller  than   itself.  Once  the  golem  goes  berserk,  it  continues  to  do   so  until  it  is  destroyed  or  regains  all  its  hit  points.      The  golem's  creator,  if  within  60  feet  of  the  berserk   golem,  can  try  to  calm  it  by  speaking  firmly  and   persuasively.  The  golem  must  be  able  to  hear  its   creator,  who  must  take  an  action  to  make  a  DC  15   Charisma  (Persuasion)  check.  If  the  check  succeeds,  the   golem  ceases  being  berserk.  If  it  takes  damage  while   still  at  40  hit  points  or  fewer,  the  golem  might  go   berserk  again.  
Aversion  of  Fire.  If  the  golem  takes  fire  damage,  it  has   disadvantage  on  attack  rolls  and  ability  checks  until  the   end  of  its  next  turn.  
Immutable  Form.  The  golem  is  immune  to  any  spell  or   effect  that  would  alter  its  form.  
Lightning  Absorption.  Whenever  the  golem  is   subjected  to  lightning  damage,  it  takes  no  damage  and   instead  regains  a  number  of  hit  points  equal  to  the   lightning  damage  dealt.  
Magic  Resistance.  The  golem  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Magic  Weapons.  The  golem's  weapon  attacks  are   magical.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  golem  makes  two  slam  attacks.  
Slam.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  13  (2d8  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.  
  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

316+}  

Iron  Golem  
Large  construct,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  20  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  210  (20d10  +  100)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      24  (+7)   9  (-1)   20  (+5)   3  (-4)   11  (+0)   1  (-5)   Damage  Immunities  fire,  poison,  psychic;  bludgeoning,  
piercing,  and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  that   aren't  adamantine   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  exhaustion,  frightened,   paralyzed,  petrified,  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  10  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

319-]   Languages  understands  the  languages  of  its  creator  but   can't  speak   Challenge  16  (15,000  XP)        Fire  Absorption.  Whenever  the  golem  is  subjected  to   fire  damage,  it  takes  no  damage  and  instead  regains  a   number  of  hit  points  equal  to  the  fire  damage  dealt.   Immutable  Form.  The  golem  is  immune  to  any  spell  or   effect  that  would  alter  its  form.   Magic  Resistance.  The  golem  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.   Magic  Weapons.  The  golem's  weapon  attacks  are   magical.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  golem  makes  two  melee  attacks.   Slam.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +13  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  20  (3d8  +  7)  bludgeoning  damage.   Sword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +13  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  23  (3d10  +  7)  slashing  damage.   Poison  Breath  (Recharge  6).  The  golem  exhales   poisonous  gas  in  a  15-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that   area  must  make  a  DC  19  Constitution  saving  throw,   taking  45  (10d8)  poison  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or   half  as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.     
Stone  Golem  
Large  construct,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  178  (17d10  +  85)   Speed  30  ft.  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      22  (+6)   9  (-1)   20  (+5)   3  (-4)   11  (+0)   1  (-5)  
Damage  Immunities  poison,  psychic;  bludgeoning,   piercing,  and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  that   aren't  adamantine  
Condition  Immunities  charmed,  exhaustion,  frightened,   paralyzed,  petrified,  poisoned  
Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  understands  the  languages  of  its  creator  but  
can't  speak   Challenge  10  (5,900  XP)        Immutable  Form.  The  golem  is  immune  to  any  spell  or   effect  that  would  alter  its  form.   Magic  Resistance.  The  golem  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.   Magic  Weapons.  The  golem's  weapon  attacks  are   magical.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  golem  makes  two  slam  attacks.   Slam.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  19  (3d8  +  6)  bludgeoning  damage.   Slow  (Recharge  5­6).  The  golem  targets  one  or  more   creatures  it  can  see  within  10  feet  of  it.  Each  target   must  make  a  DC  17  Wisdom  saving  throw  against  this   magic.  On  a  failed  save,  a  target  can't  use  reactions,  its   speed  is  halved,  and  it  can't  make  more  than  one   attack  on  its  turn.  In  addition,  the  target  can  take   either  an  action  or  a  bonus  action  on  its  turn,  not  both.   These  effects  last  for  1  minute.  A  target  can  repeat  the   saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending  the   effect  on  itself  on  a  success.     
Gorgon  
Large  monstrosity,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  19  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  114  (12d10  +  48)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      20  (+5)   11  (+0)   18  (+4)   2  (-4)   12  (+1)   7  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +4   Condition  Immunities  petrified   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  14  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

317+}  

Languages  --   Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)        Trampling  Charge.  If  the  gorgon  moves  at  least  20  feet   straight  toward  a  creature  and  then  hits  it  with  a  gore   attack  on  the  same  turn,  that  target  must  succeed  on  a   DC  16  Strength  saving  throw  or  be  knocked  prone.  If   the  target  is  prone,  the  gorgon  can  make  one  attack   with  its  hooves  against  it  as  a  bonus  action.  
Actions  
Gore.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  18  (2d12  +  5)  piercing  damage.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

320-]   Hooves.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  16  (2d10  +  5)  bludgeoning  damage.   Petrifying  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  gorgon  exhales   petrifying  gas  in  a  30-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that   area  must  succeed  on  a  DC  13  Constitution  saving   throw.  On  a  failed  save,  a  target  begins  to  turn  to  stone   and  is  restrained.  The  restrained  target  must  repeat   the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  its  next  turn.  On  a   success,  the  effect  ends  on  the  target.  On  a  failure,  the   target  is  petrified  until  freed  by  the  greater  restoration   spell  or  other  magic.     
Grick  
Medium  monstrosity,  neutral  
Armor  Class  14  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  27  (6d8)   Speed  30  ft.,  climb  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      14  (+2)   14  (+2)   11  (+0)   3  (-4)   14  (+2)   5  (-3)  
Damage  Resistances  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and   slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  12   Languages  --   Challenge  2  (450  XP)        Stone  Camouflage.  The  grick  has  advantage  on   Dexterity  (Stealth)  checks  made  to  hide  in  rocky  terrain.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  grick  makes  one  attack  with  its   tentacles.  If  that  attack  hits,  the  grick  can  make  one   beak  attack  against  the  same  target.  

Tentacles.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  9  (2d6  +  2)  slashing  damage.   Beak.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing  damage.     
Griffon  
Large  monstrosity,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  59  (7d10  +  21)   Speed  30  ft.,  fly  80  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   15  (+2)   16  (+3)   2  (-4)   13  (+1)   8  (-1)  
Skills  Perception  +5   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  15   Languages  --   Challenge  2  (450  XP)        Keen  Sight.  The  griffon  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  sight.  
Actions   Multiattack.  The  griffon  makes  two  attacks:  one  with   its  beak  and  one  with  its  claws.   Beak.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  8  (1d8  +  4)  piercing  damage.   Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  slashing  damage.     
Grimlock  
Medium  humanoid  (grimlock),  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  11   Hit  Points  11  (2d8  +  2)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      16  (+3)   12  (+1)   12  (+1)   9  (-1)   8  (-1)   6  (-2)  
Skills  Athletics  +5,  Perception  +3,  Stealth  +3   Condition  Immunities  blinded   Senses  blindsight  30  ft.  or  10  ft.  while  deafened  (blind  
beyond  this  radius),  passive  Perception  13   Languages  Undercommon   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

318+}  

     Blind  Senses.  The  grimlock  can't  use  its  blindsight  while   deafened  and  unable  to  smell.   Keen  Hearing  and  Smell.  The  grimlock  has  advantage   on  Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  hearing  or   smell.   Stone  Camouflage.  The  grimlock  has  advantage  on   Dexterity  (Stealth)  checks  made  to  hide  in  rocky  terrain.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

321-]  
Actions  
Spiked  Bone  Club.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,   reach  5  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d4  +  3)  bludgeoning   damage  plus  2  (1d4)  piercing  damage.  
Monsters (H)
  
Hags
Green  Hag  
Medium  fey,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  82  (11d8  +  33)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   12  (+1)   16  (+3)   13  (+1)   14  (+2)   14  (+2)  
Skills  Arcana  +3,  Deception  +4,  Perception  +4,  Stealth   +3  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  14   Languages  Common,  Draconic,  Sylvan   Challenge  3  (700  XP)        Amphibious.  The  hag  can  breathe  air  and  water.   Innate  Spellcasting.  The  hag's  innate  spellcasting   ability  is  Charisma  (spell  save  DC  12).  She  can  innately   cast  the  following  spells,  requiring  no  material   components:   At  will:  dancing  lights,  minor  illusion,  vicious  mockery   Mimicry.  The  hag  can  mimic  animal  sounds  and   humanoid  voices.  A  creature  that  hears  the  sounds  can   tell  they  are  imitations  with  a  successful  DC  14  Wisdom   (Insight)  check.  

Actions  
Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  13  (2d8  +  4)  slashing  damage.  
Illusory  Appearance.  The  hag  covers  herself  and   anything  she  is  wearing  or  carrying  with  a  magical   illusion  that  makes  her  look  like  another  creature  of   her  general  size  and  humanoid  shape.  The  illusion  ends   if  the  hag  takes  a  bonus  action  to  end  it  or  if  she  dies.      The  changes  wrought  by  this  effect  fail  to  hold  up  to   physical  inspection.  For  example,  the  hag  could  appear   to  have  smooth  skin,  but  someone  touching  her  would   feel  her  rough  flesh.  Otherwise,  a  creature  must  take   an  action  to  visually  inspect  the  illusion  and  succeed  on   a  DC  20  Intelligence  (Investigation)  check  to  discern   that  the  hag  is  disguised.  
Invisible  Passage.  The  hag  magically  turns  invisible   until  she  attacks  or  casts  a  spell,  or  until  her   concentration  ends  (as  if  concentrating  on  a  spell).   While  invisible,  she  leaves  no  physical  evidence  of  her   passage,  so  she  can  be  tracked  only  by  magic.  Any   equipment  she  wears  or  carries  is  invisible  with  her.  
  
Night  Hag  
Medium  fiend,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  112  (15d8  +  45)  
Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   18  (+4)   15  (+2)   16  (+3)   16  (+3)   14  (+2)   16  (+3)  
Skills  Deception  +7,  Insight  +6,  Perception  +6,  Stealth   +6  
Damage  Resistances  cold,  fire;  bludgeoning,  piercing,   and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  not  made  with   silvered  weapons  
Condition  Immunities  charmed  
Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  16  
Languages  Abyssal,  Common,  Infernal,  Primordial  
Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)  
    
Innate  Spellcasting.  The  hag's  innate  spellcasting   ability  is  Charisma  (spell  save  DC  14,  +6  to  hit  with  spell   attacks).  She  can  innately  cast  the  following  spells,   requiring  no  material  components:  
At  will:  detect  magic,  magic  missile  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

319+}  

2/day  each:  plane  shift  (self  only),  ray  of  enfeeblement,   sleep  
Magic  Resistance.  The  hag  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Actions  
Claws  (Hag  Form  Only).  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to   hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  13  (2d8  +  4)  slashing   damage.  
Change  Shape.  The  hag  magically  polymorphs  into  a   Small  or  Medium  female  humanoid,  or  back  into  her  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

322-]   true  form.  Her  statistics  are  the  same  in  each  form.  Any   equipment  she  is  wearing  or  carrying  isn't  transformed.   She  reverts  to  her  true  form  if  she  dies.  
Etherealness.  The  hag  magically  enters  the  Ethereal   Plane  from  the  Material  Plane,  or  vice  versa.  To  do  so,   the  hag  must  have  a  heartstone  in  her  possession.  
Nightmare  Haunting  (1/Day).  While  on  the  Ethereal   Plane,  the  hag  magically  touches  a  sleeping  humanoid   on  the  Material  Plane.  A  protection  from  evil  and  good   spell  cast  on  the  target  prevents  this  contact,  as  does  a   magic  circle.  As  long  as  the  contact  persists,  the  target   has  dreadful  visions.  If  these  visions  last  for  at  least  1   hour,  the  target  gains  no  benefit  from  its  rest,  and  its   hit  point  maximum  is  reduced  by  5  (1d10).  If  this  effect   reduces  the  target's  hit  point  maximum  to  0,  the  target   dies,  and  if  the  target  was  evil,  its  soul  is  trapped  in  the   hag's  soul  bag.  The  reduction  to  the  target's  hit  point   maximum  lasts  until  removed  by  the  greater   restoration  spell  or  similar  magic.  
   Sea  Hag  
Medium  fey,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  14  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  52  (7d8  +  21)  
Speed  30  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   16  (+3)   13  (+1)   16  (+3)   12  (+1)   12  (+1)   13  (+1)  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  11  
Languages  Aquan,  Common,  Giant  
Challenge  2  (450  XP)  
    
Amphibious.  The  hag  can  breathe  air  and  water.  
Horrific  Appearance.  Any  humanoid  that  starts  its  turn   within  30  feet  of  the  hag  and  can  see  the  hag's  true  

form  must  make  a  DC  11  Wisdom  saving  throw.  On  a   failed  save,  the  creature  is  frightened  for  1  minute.  A   creature  can  repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of   each  of  its  turns,  with  disadvantage  if  the  hag  is  within   line  of  sight,  ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If   a  creature's  saving  throw  is  successful  or  the  effect   ends  for  it,  the  creature  is  immune  to  the  hag's  Horrific   Appearance  for  the  next  24  hours.      Unless  the  target  is  surprised  or  the  revelation  of  the   hag's  true  form  is  sudden,  the  target  can  avert  its  eyes   and  avoid  making  the  initial  saving  throw.  Until  the   start  of  its  next  turn,  a  creature  that  averts  its  eyes  has   disadvantage  on  attack  rolls  against  the  hag.  

Actions  
Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  10  (2d6  +  3)  slashing  damage.  
Death  Glare.  The  hag  targets  one  frightened  creature   she  can  see  within  30  feet  of  her.  If  the  target  can  see   the  hag,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  11  Wisdom  saving   throw  against  this  magic  or  drop  to  0  hit  points.  
Illusory  Appearance.  The  hag  covers  herself  and   anything  she  is  wearing  or  carrying  with  a  magical   illusion  that  makes  her  look  like  an  ugly  creature  of  her   general  size  and  humanoid  shape.  The  effect  ends  if   the  hag  takes  a  bonus  action  to  end  it  or  if  she  dies.      The  changes  wrought  by  this  effect  fail  to  hold  up  to   physical  inspection.  For  example,  the  hag  could  appear   to  have  no  claws,  but  someone  touching  her  hand   might  feel  the  claws.  Otherwise,  a  creature  must  take   an  action  to  visually  inspect  the  illusion  and  succeed  on   a  DC  16  Intelligence  (Investigation)  check  to  discern   that  the  hag  is  disguised.  
  
Half-Dragon Template

A  beast,  humanoid,  giant,  or  monstrosity  can  become   a  half-dragon.  It  keeps  its  statistics,  except  as  follows.      Challenge.  To  avoid  recalculating  the  creature's   challenge  rating,  apply  the  template  only  to  a   creature  that  meets  the  optional  prerequisite  in  the   Breath  Weapon  table  below.  Otherwise,  recalculate   the  rating  after  you  apply  the  template.      Senses.  The  half-dragon  gains  blindsight  with  a   radius  of  10  feet  and  darkvision  with  a  radius  of  60   feet.      Resistances.  The  half-dragon  gains  resistance  to  a   type  of  damage  based  on  its  color.  

Color  

[-Damage  Resistance-]   Black  or  copper   [-Acid-]   Blue  or  bronze  

{+Damage  Resistance   Acid+}   Lightning  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

320+}  

Brass,  gold,  or  red   Fire  

Green  

Poison  

Silver  or  white  

Cold  

  

   Languages.  The  half-dragon  speaks  Draconic  in  

addition  to  any  other  languages  it  knows.  

   New  Action:  Breath  Weapon.  The  half-dragon  has  

the  breath  weapon  of  its  dragon  half.  The  half-

dragon's  size  determines  how  this  action  functions.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

323-]  

Size   Breath  Weapon  

Large  or  

As  a  wyrmling  

smaller  

Huge  

As  a  young  dragon  

Gargantuan   As  an  adult  dragon  

  

Half-Red  Dragon  Veteran  

Optional   Prerequisite   Challenge  2  or  higher  
Challenge  7  or  higher   Challenge  8  or  higher  

Medium  humanoid  (human),  any  alignment  

Armor  Class  18  (plate)   Hit  Points  65  (10d8  +  20)   Speed  30  ft.  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      16  (+3)   13  (+1)   14  (+2)   10  (+0)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)  

Skills  Athletics  +5,  Perception  +2   Damage  Resistances  fire   Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  
Perception  12   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)  

Actions  
Multiattack.  The  veteran  makes  two  longsword  attacks.   If  it  has  a  shortsword  drawn,  it  can  also  make  a   shortsword  attack.  
Longsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  7  (1d8  +  3)  slashing  damage,  or  8  (1d10   +  3)  slashing  damage  if  used  with  two  hands.  
Shortsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  6  (1d6  +  3)  piercing  damage.  
Heavy  Crossbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,   range  100/400  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  6  (1d10  +  1)  piercing   damage.  
Fire  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  veteran  exhales  fire  in   a  15-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  make  a   DC  15  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  24  (7d6)  fire   damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on  a   successful  one.  

  
Harpy  
Medium  monstrosity,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  11  
Hit  Points  38  (7d8  +  7)  
Speed  20  ft.,  fly  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   12  (+1)   13  (+1)   12  (+1)   7  (-2)   10  (+0)   13  (+1)  
Senses  passive  Perception  10  
Languages  Common  
Challenge  1  (200  XP)  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  harpy  makes  two  attacks:  one  with  its   claws  and  one  with  its  club.  
Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  6  (2d4  +  1)  slashing  damage.  
Club.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  3  (1d4  +  1)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Luring  Song.  The  harpy  sings  a  magical  melody.  Every   humanoid  and  giant  within  300  feet  of  the  harpy  that   can  hear  the  song  must  succeed  on  a  DC  11  Wisdom   saving  throw  or  be  charmed  until  the  song  ends.  The   harpy  must  take  a  bonus  action  on  its  subsequent  turns   to  continue  singing.  It  can  stop  singing  at  any  time.  The   song  ends  if  the  harpy  is  incapacitated.      While  charmed  by  the  harpy,  a  target  is   incapacitated  and  ignores  the  songs  of  other  harpies.  If   the  charmed  target  is  more  than  5  feet  away  from  the   harpy,  the  target  must  move  on  its  turn  toward  the   harpy  by  the  most  direct  route,  trying  to  get  within  5   feet.  It  doesn't  avoid  opportunity  attacks,  but  before   moving  into  damaging  terrain,  such  as  lava  or  a  pit,  and   whenever  it  takes  damage  from  a  source  other  than   the  harpy,  the  target  can  repeat  the  saving  throw.  A   charmed  target  can  also  repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the   end  of  each  of  its  turns.  If  the  saving  throw  is   successful,  the  effect  ends  on  it.      A  target  that  successfully  saves  is  immune  to  this   harpy's  song  for  the  next  24  hours.  
  
Hell  Hound  
Medium  fiend,  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  15  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  45  (7d8  +  14)  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

321+}  

Speed  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      17  (+3)   12  (+1)   14  (+2)   6  (-2)   13  (+1)   6  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +5   Damage  Immunities  fire   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  15  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

324-]   Languages  understands  Infernal  but  can't  speak  it   Challenge  3  (700  XP)        Keen  Hearing  and  Smell.  The  hound  has  advantage  on   Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  hearing  or   smell.   Pack  Tactics.  The  hound  has  advantage  on  an  attack   roll  against  a  creature  if  at  least  one  of  the  hound's   allies  is  within  5  feet  of  the  creature  and  the  ally  isn't   incapacitated.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (1d8  +  3)  piercing  damage  plus  7  (2d6)  fire   damage.   Fire  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  hound  exhales  fire  in  a   15-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  make  a   DC  12  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  21  (6d6)  fire   damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on  a   successful  one.     
Hippogriff  
Large  monstrosity,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  11   Hit  Points  19  (3d10  +  3)   Speed  40  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      17  (+3)   13  (+1)   13  (+1)   2  (-4)   12  (+1)   8  (-1)  
Skills  Perception  +5   Senses  passive  Perception  15   Languages  --   Challenge  1  (200  XP)        Keen  Sight.  The  hippogriff  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  sight.  

Actions  
Multiattack.  The  hippogriff  makes  two  attacks:  one   with  its  beak  and  one  with  its  claws.   Beak.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  8  (1d10  +  3)  piercing  damage.   Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  10  (2d6  +  3)  slashing  damage.     
Hobgoblin  
Medium  humanoid  (goblinoid),  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  18  (chain  mail,  shield)   Hit  Points  11  (2d8  +  2)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      13  (+1)   12  (+1)   12  (+1)   10  (+0)   10  (+0)   9  (-1)  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  Common,  Goblin   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)        Martial  Advantage.  Once  per  turn,  the  hobgoblin  can   deal  an  extra  7  (2d6)  damage  to  a  creature  it  hits  with  a   weapon  attack  if  that  creature  is  within  5  feet  of  an  ally   of  the  hobgoblin  that  isn't  incapacitated.  
Actions  
Longsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d8  +  1)  slashing  damage,  or  6  (1d10   +  1)  slashing  damage  if  used  with  two  hands.   Longbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  range   150/600  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d8  +  1)  piercing   damage.     
Homunculus  
Tiny  construct,  neutral  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  5  (2d4)   Speed  20  ft.,  fly  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      4  (-3)   15  (+2)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)   10  (+0)   7  (-2)  
Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

322+}  

Languages  understands  the  languages  of  its  creator  but   can't  speak  
Challenge  0  (10  XP)  
    
Telepathic  Bond.  While  the  homunculus  is  on  the  same   plane  of  existence  as  its  master,  it  can  magically  convey   what  it  senses  to  its  master,  and  the  two  can   communicate  telepathically.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

325  

Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4-]  
{+Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4+}  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  1  piercing  damage,  and  the  target  must   succeed  on  a  DC  10  Constitution  saving  throw  or  be   poisoned  for  1  minute.  If  the  saving  throw  fails  by  5  or   more,  the  target  is  instead  poisoned  for  5  (1d10)   minutes  and  unconscious  while  poisoned  in  this  way.  
  
Hydra  
Huge  monstrosity,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  15  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  172  (15d12  +  75)  
Speed  30  ft.,  swim  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   20  (+5)   12  (+1)   20  (+5)   2  (-4)   10  (+0)   7  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +6  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  16  
Languages  --  
Challenge  8  (3,900  XP)  
    
Hold  Breath.  The  hydra  can  hold  its  breath  for  1  hour.  
Multiple  Heads.  The  hydra  has  five  heads.  While  it  has   more  than  one  head,  the  hydra  has  advantage  on   saving  throws  against  being  blinded,  charmed,   deafened,  frightened,  stunned,  and  knocked   unconscious.      Whenever  the  hydra  takes  25  or  more  damage  in  a   single  turn,  one  of  its  heads  dies.  If  all  its  heads  die,  the   hydra  dies.      At  the  end  of  its  turn,  it  grows  two  heads  for  each  of   its  heads  that  died  since  its  last  turn,  unless  it  has  taken   fire  damage  since  its  last  turn.  The  hydra  regains  10  hit   points  for  each  head  regrown  in  this  way.  
Reactive  Heads.  For  each  head  the  hydra  has  beyond   one,  it  gets  an  extra  reaction  that  can  be  used  only  for   opportunity  attacks.  

Wakeful.  While  the  hydra  sleeps,  at  least  one  of  its   heads  is  awake.  
Actions   Multiattack.  The  hydra  makes  as  many  bite  attacks  as   it  has  heads.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  10  (1d10  +  5)  piercing  damage.     
Monsters (I)
  
Invisible  Stalker  
Medium  elemental, neutral  
Armor  Class  14   Hit  Points  104  (16d8  +  32)   Speed  50  ft.,  fly  50  ft.  (hover)  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      16  (+3)   19  (+4)   14  (+2)   10  (+0)   15  (+2)   11  (+0)  
Skills  Perception  +8,  Stealth  +10   Damage  Resistances  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and  
slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  exhaustion,  grappled,  paralyzed,  
petrified,  poisoned,  prone,  restrained,  unconscious   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  18   Languages  Auran,  understands  Common  but  doesn't  
speak  it   Challenge  6  (2,300  XP)        Invisibility.  The  stalker  is  invisible.   Faultless  Tracker.  The  stalker  is  given  a  quarry  by  its   summoner.  The  stalker  knows  the  direction  and   distance  to  its  quarry  as  long  as  the  two  of  them  are  on   the  same  plane  of  existence.  The  stalker  also  knows  the   location  of  its  summoner.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  stalker  makes  two  slam  attacks.   Slam.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  10  (2d6  +  3)  bludgeoning  damage.     

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

323+}  

Monsters (K)
  
Kobold  
Small  humanoid  (kobold),  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  5  (2d6  -  2)   Speed  30  ft.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

326-]  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      7  (-2)   15  (+2)   9  (-1)   8  (-1)   7  (-2)   8  (-1)  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  8   Languages  Common,  Draconic   Challenge  1/8  (25  XP)        Sunlight  Sensitivity.  While  in  sunlight,  the  kobold  has   disadvantage  on  attack  rolls,  as  well  as  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  sight.   Pack  Tactics.  The  kobold  has  advantage  on  an  attack   roll  against  a  creature  if  at  least  one  of  the  kobold's   allies  is  within  5  feet  of  the  creature  and  the  ally  isn't   incapacitated.  
Actions  
Dagger.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  4  (1d4  +  2)  piercing  damage.   Sling.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  range  30/120   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  4  (1d4  +  2)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Kraken  
Gargantuan  monstrosity  (titan), chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  18  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  472  (27d20  +  189)   Speed  20  ft.,  swim  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      30  (+10)   11  (+0)   25  (+7)   22  (+6)   18  (+4)   20  (+5)  
Saving  Throws  Str  +17,  Dex  +7,  Con  +14,  Int  +13,  Wis   +11  
Damage  Immunities  lightning;  bludgeoning,  piercing,   and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  
Condition  Immunities  frightened,  paralyzed   Senses  truesight  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  14  

Languages  understands  Abyssal,  Celestial,  Infernal,  and   Primordial  but  can't  speak,  telepathy  120  ft.  
Challenge  23  (50,000  XP)  
    
Amphibious.  The  kraken  can  breathe  air  and  water.  
Freedom  of  Movement.  The  kraken  ignores  difficult   terrain,  and  magical  effects  can't  reduce  its  speed  or   cause  it  to  be  restrained.  It  can  spend  5  feet  of   movement  to  escape  from  nonmagical  restraints  or   being  grappled.  
Siege  Monster.  The  kraken  deals  double  damage  to   objects  and  structures.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  kraken  makes  three  tentacle  attacks,   each  of  which  it  can  replace  with  one  use  of  Fling.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +17  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  23  (3d8  +  10)  piercing  damage.  If  the  target   is  a  Large  or  smaller  creature  grappled  by  the  kraken,   that  creature  is  swallowed,  and  the  grapple  ends.   While  swallowed,  the  creature  is  blinded  and   restrained,  it  has  total  cover  against  attacks  and  other   effects  outside  the  kraken,  and  it  takes  42  (12d6)  acid   damage  at  the  start  of  each  of  the  kraken's  turns.      If  the  kraken  takes  50  damage  or  more  on  a  single   turn  from  a  creature  inside  it,  the  kraken  must  succeed   on  a  DC  25  Constitution  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  that   turn  or  regurgitate  all  swallowed  creatures,  which  fall   prone  in  a  space  within  10  feet  of  the  kraken.  If  the   kraken  dies,  a  swallowed  creature  is  no  longer   restrained  by  it  and  can  escape  from  the  corpse  using   15  feet  of  movement,  exiting  prone.  
Tentacle.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +17  to  hit,  reach  30  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  20  (3d6  +  10)  bludgeoning  damage,  and   the  target  is  grappled  (escape  DC  18).  Until  this  grapple   ends,  the  target  is  restrained.  The  kraken  has  ten   tentacles,  each  of  which  can  grapple  one  target.  
Fling.  One  Large  or  smaller  object  held  or  creature   grappled  by  the  kraken  is  thrown  up  to  60  feet  in  a   random  direction  and  knocked  prone.  If  a  thrown   target  strikes  a  solid  surface,  the  target  takes  3  (1d6)   bludgeoning  damage  for  every  10  feet  it  was  thrown.  If   the  target  is  thrown  at  another  creature,  that  creature   must  succeed  on  a  DC  18  Dexterity  saving  throw  or   take  the  same  damage  and  be  knocked  prone.  
Lightning  Storm.  The  kraken  magically  creates  three   bolts  of  lightning,  each  of  which  can  strike  a  target  the   kraken  can  see  within  120  feet  of  it.  A  target  must   make  a  DC  23  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  22  (4d10)  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

324+}  

lightning  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  kraken  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing  from   the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action  option   can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of  another   creature's  turn.  The  kraken  regains  spent  legendary   actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

327-]   Tentacle  Attack  or  Fling.  The  kraken  makes  one  
tentacle  attack  or  uses  its  Fling.  
Lightning  Storm  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  kraken  uses   Lightning  Storm.  
Ink  Cloud  (Costs  3  Actions).  While  underwater,  the   kraken  expels  an  ink  cloud  in  a  60-foot  radius.  The   cloud  spreads  around  corners,  and  that  area  is   heavily  obscured  to  creatures  other  than  the  kraken.   Each  creature  other  than  the  kraken  that  ends  its   turn  there  must  succeed  on  a  DC  23  Constitution   saving  throw,  taking  16  (3d10)  poison  damage  on  a   failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on  a  successful   one.  A  strong  current  disperses  the  cloud,  which   otherwise  disappears  at  the  end  of  the  kraken's  next   turn.  
  
Monsters (L)
  
Lamia  
Large  monstrosity,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  97  (13d10  +  26)  
Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      16  (+3)   13  (+1)   15  (+2)   14  (+2)   15  (+2)   16  (+3)  
Skills  Deception  +7,  Insight  +4,  Stealth  +3   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  12   Languages  Abyssal,  Common   Challenge  4  (1,100  XP)  
     Innate  Spellcasting.  The  lamia's  innate  spellcasting   ability  is  Charisma  (spell  save  DC  13).  It  can  innately   cast  the  following  spells,  requiring  no  material   components.  

At  will:  disguise  self  (any  humanoid  form),  major  image   3/day  each:  charm  person,  mirror  image,  scrying,  
suggestion   1/day:  geas  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  lamia  makes  two  attacks:  one  with  its   claws  and  one  with  its  dagger  or  Intoxicating  Touch.   Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  14  (2d10  +  3)  slashing  damage.   Dagger.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d4  +  3)  piercing  damage.   Intoxicating  Touch.  Melee  Spell  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach   5  ft.,  one  creature.  Hit:  The  target  is  magically  cursed   for  1  hour.  Until  the  curse  ends,  the  target  has   disadvantage  on  Wisdom  saving  throws  and  all  ability   checks.     
Lich  
Medium  undead,  any  evil  alignment  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  135  (18d8  +  54)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      11  (+0)   16  (+3)   16  (+3)   20  (+5)   14  (+2)   16  (+3)  
Saving  Throws  Con  +10,  Int  +12,  Wis  +9   Skills  Arcana  +18,  History  +12,  Insight  +9,  Perception  +9   Damage  Resistances  cold,  lightning,  necrotic   Damage  Immunities  poison;  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and  
slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  exhaustion,  frightened,  
paralyzed,  poisoned   Senses  truesight  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  19   Languages  Common  plus  up  to  five  other  languages   Challenge  21  (33,000  XP)        Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  lich  fails  a  saving   throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.   Rejuvenation.  If  it  has  a  phylactery,  a  destroyed  lich   gains  a  new  body  in  1d10  days,  regaining  all  its  hit   points  and  becoming  active  again.  The  new  body   appears  within  5  feet  of  the  phylactery.   Spellcasting.  The  lich  is  an  18th-level  spellcaster.  Its   spellcasting  ability  is  Intelligence  (spell  save  DC  20,  +12  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

325+}  

to  hit  with  spell  attacks).  The  lich  has  the  following   wizard  spells  prepared:  
Cantrips  (at  will):  mage  hand,  prestidigitation,  ray  of   frost  
1st  level  (4  slots):  detect  magic,  magic  missile,  shield,   thunderwave  
2nd  level  (3  slots):  acid  arrow,  detect  thoughts,   invisibility,  mirror  image  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

328-]  
3rd  level  (3  slots):  animate  dead,  counterspell,  dispel   magic,  fireball  
4th  level  (3  slots):  blight,  dimension  door  
5th  level  (3  slots):  cloudkill,  scrying  
6th  level  (1  slot):  disintegrate,  globe  of  invulnerability  
7th  level  (1  slot):  finger  of  death,  plane  shift  
8th  level  (1  slot):  dominate  monster,  power  word  stun  
9th  level  (1  slot):  power  word  kill  
Turn  Resistance.  The  lich  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  any  effect  that  turns  undead.  
Actions  
Paralyzing  Touch.  Melee  Spell  Attack:  +12  to  hit,  reach   5  ft.,  one  creature.  Hit:  10  (3d6)  cold  damage.  The   target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  18  Constitution  saving   throw  or  be  paralyzed  for  1  minute.  The  target  can   repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,   ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  lich  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing  from   the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action  option   can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of  another   creature's  turn.  The  lich  regains  spent  legendary   actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Cantrip.  The  lich  casts  a  cantrip.  
Paralyzing  Touch  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  lich  uses  its   Paralyzing  Touch.  
Frightening  Gaze  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  lich  fixes  its   gaze  on  one  creature  it  can  see  within  10  feet  of  it.   The  target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  18  Wisdom  saving   throw  against  this  magic  or  become  frightened  for  1   minute.  The  frightened  target  can  repeat  the  saving   throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending  the   effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  target's  saving  throw   is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the  target  is   immune  to  the  lich's  gaze  for  the  next  24  hours.  

Disrupt  Life  (Costs  3  Actions).  Each  [-living-]  {+non-undead+}   creature  within  20  feet  of  the  lich  must  make  a  DC   18  Constitution  saving  throw  against  this  magic,   taking  21  (6d6)  necrotic  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or   half  as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.  
  
Lizardfolk  
Medium  humanoid  (lizardfolk),  neutral  
Armor  Class  15  (natural  armor,  shield)   Hit  Points  22  (4d8  +  4)   Speed  30  ft.,  swim  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   10  (+0)   13  (+1)   7  (-2)   12  (+1)   7  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +3,  Stealth  +4,  Survival  +5   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  Draconic   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)        Hold  Breath.  The  lizardfolk  can  hold  its  breath  for  15   minutes.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  lizardfolk  makes  two  melee  attacks,   each  one  with  a  different  weapon.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing  damage.   Heavy  Club.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  bludgeoning  damage.   Javelin.  Melee  or  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,   reach  5  ft.  or  range  30/120  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +   2)  piercing  damage.   Spiked  Shield.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing  damage.     
Lycanthropes
Werebear  
Medium  humanoid  (human,  shapechanger),  neutral   good  
Armor  Class  10  in  humanoid  form,  11  (natural  armor)   in  bear  and  hybrid  form  
Hit  Points  135  (18d8  +  54)   Speed  30  ft.  (40  ft.,  climb  30  ft.  in  bear  or  hybrid  form)  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

326+}  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   19  (+4)   10  (+0)   17  (+3)   11  (+0)   12  (+1)   12  (+1)  
Skills  Perception  +7  
Damage  Immunities  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and   slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  not  made  with   silvered  weapons  
Senses  passive  Perception  17  
Languages  Common  (can't  speak  in  bear  form)  
Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

329-]  
    
Shapechanger.  The  werebear  can  use  its  action  to   polymorph  into  a  Large  bear-humanoid  hybrid  or  into  a   Large  bear,  or  back  into  its  true  form,  which  is   humanoid.  Its  statistics,  other  than  its  size  and  AC,  are   the  same  in  each  form.  Any  equipment  it  is  wearing  or   carrying  isn't  transformed.  It  reverts  to  its  true  form  if   it  dies.  
Keen  Smell.  The  werebear  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  smell.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  In  bear  form,  the  werebear  makes  two   claw  attacks.  In  humanoid  form,  it  makes  two  greataxe   attacks.  In  hybrid  form,  it  can  attack  like  a  bear  or  a   humanoid.  
Bite  (Bear  or  Hybrid  Form  Only).  Melee  Weapon   Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  15  (2d10  +   4)  piercing  damage.  If  the  target  is  a  humanoid,  it  must   succeed  on  a  DC  14  Constitution  saving  throw  or  be   cursed  with  werebear  lycanthropy.  
Claw  (Bear  or  Hybrid  Form  Only).  Melee  Weapon   Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  13  (2d8  +   4)  slashing  damage.  
Greataxe  (Humanoid  or  Hybrid  Form  Only).  Melee   Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:   10  (1d12  +  4)  slashing  damage.  
   Wereboar  
Medium  humanoid  (human,  shapechanger),  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  10  in  humanoid  form,  11  (natural  armor)   in  boar  or  hybrid  form  
Hit  Points  78  (12d8  +  24)  
Speed  30  ft.  (40  ft.  in  boar  form)  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   17  (+3)   10  (+0)   15  (+2)   10  (+0)   11  (+0)   8  (-1)  

Skills  Perception  +2  
Damage  Immunities  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and   slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  not  made  with   silvered  weapons  Senses  passive  Perception  12  
Languages  Common  (can't  speak  in  boar  form)  
Challenge  4  (1,100  XP)  
    
Shapechanger.  The  wereboar  can  use  its  action  to   polymorph  into  a  boar-humanoid  hybrid  or  into  a  boar,   or  back  into  its  true  form,  which  is  humanoid.  Its   statistics,  other  than  its  AC,  are  the  same  in  each  form.   Any  equipment  it  is  wearing  or  carrying  isn't   transformed.  It  reverts  to  its  true  form  if  it  dies.  
Charge  (Boar  or  Hybrid  Form  Only).  If  the  wereboar   moves  at  least  15  feet  straight  toward  a  target  and   then  hits  it  with  its  tusks  on  the  same  turn,  the  target   takes  an  extra  7  (2d6)  slashing  damage.  If  the  target  is   a  creature,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  13  Strength  saving   throw  or  be  knocked  prone.  
Relentless  (Recharges  after  a  Short  or  Long  Rest).  If   the  wereboar  takes  14  damage  or  less  that  would   reduce  it  to  0  hit  points,  it  is  reduced  to  1  hit  point   instead.  
Actions  
Multiattack  (Humanoid  or  Hybrid  Form  Only).  The   wereboar  makes  two  attacks,  only  one  of  which  can  be   with  its  tusks.  
Maul  (Humanoid  or  Hybrid  Form  Only).  Melee   Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:   10  (2d6  +  3)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Tusks  (Boar  or  Hybrid  Form  Only).  Melee  Weapon   Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  10  (2d6  +   3)  slashing  damage.  If  the  target  is  a  humanoid,  it  must   succeed  on  a  DC  12  Constitution  saving  throw  or  be   cursed  with  wereboar  lycanthropy.  
  
Wererat  
Medium  humanoid  (human,  shapechanger),  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  12  
Hit  Points  33  (6d8  +  6)  
Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   10  (+0)   15  (+2)   12  (+1)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)   8  (-1)  
Skills  Perception  +2,  Stealth  +4  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

327+}  

Damage  Immunities  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and   slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  not  made  with   silvered  weapons  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.  (rat  form  only),  passive   Perception  12  
Languages  Common  (can't  speak  in  rat  form)   Challenge  2  (450  XP)  
     Shapechanger.  The  wererat  can  use  its  action  to   polymorph  into  a  rat-humanoid  hybrid  or  into  a  giant  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

330-]   rat,  or  back  into  its  true  form,  which  is  humanoid.  Its   statistics,  other  than  its  size,  are  the  same  in  each  form.   Any  equipment  it  is  wearing  or  carrying  isn't   transformed.  It  reverts  to  its  true  form  if  it  dies.  
Keen  Smell.  The  wererat  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  smell.  
Actions  
Multiattack  (Humanoid  or  Hybrid  Form  Only).  The   wererat  makes  two  attacks,  only  one  of  which  can  be  a   bite.  
Bite  (Rat  or  Hybrid  Form  Only).  Melee  Weapon  Attack:   +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  4  (1d4  +  2)   piercing  damage.  If  the  target  is  a  humanoid,  it  must   succeed  on  a  DC  11  Constitution  saving  throw  or  be   cursed  with  wererat  lycanthropy.  
Shortsword  (Humanoid  or  Hybrid  Form  Only).  Melee   Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5   (1d6  +  2)  piercing  damage.  
Hand  Crossbow  (Humanoid  or  Hybrid  Form  Only).   Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  range  30/120  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing  damage.  
  
Weretiger  
Medium  humanoid  (human,  shapechanger),  neutral  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  120  (16d8  +  48)  
Speed  30  ft.  (40  ft.  in  tiger  form)  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      17  (+3)   15  (+2)   16  (+3)   10  (+0)   13  (+1)   11  (+0)  
Skills  Perception  +5,  Stealth  +4   Damage  Immunities  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and  
slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  not  made  with   silvered  weapons  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  15  

Languages  Common  (can't  speak  in  tiger  form)  
Challenge  4  (1,100  XP)  
    
Shapechanger.  The  weretiger  can  use  its  action  to   polymorph  into  a  tiger-humanoid  hybrid  or  into  a  tiger,   or  back  into  its  true  form,  which  is  humanoid.  Its   statistics,  other  than  its  size,  are  the  same  in  each  form.   Any  equipment  it  is  wearing  or  carrying  isn't   transformed.  It  reverts  to  its  true  form  if  it  dies.  
Keen  Hearing  and  Smell.  The  weretiger  has  advantage   on  Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  hearing  or   smell.  
Pounce  (Tiger  or  Hybrid  Form  Only).  If  the  weretiger   moves  at  least  15  feet  straight  toward  a  creature  and   then  hits  it  with  a  claw  attack  on  the  same  turn,  that   target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  14  Strength  saving  throw   or  be  knocked  prone.  If  the  target  is  prone,  the   weretiger  can  make  one  bite  attack  against  it  as  a   bonus  action.  
Actions  
Multiattack  (Humanoid  or  Hybrid  Form  Only).  In   humanoid  form,  the  weretiger  makes  two  scimitar   attacks  or  two  longbow  attacks.  In  hybrid  form,  it  can   attack  like  a  humanoid  or  make  two  claw  attacks.  
Bite  (Tiger  or  Hybrid  Form  Only).  Melee  Weapon   Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  8  (1d10  +   3)  piercing  damage.  If  the  target  is  a  humanoid,  it  must   succeed  on  a  DC  13  Constitution  saving  throw  or  be   cursed  with  weretiger  lycanthropy.  
Claw  (Tiger  or  Hybrid  Form  Only).  Melee  Weapon   Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  7  (1d8  +  3)   slashing  damage.  
Scimitar  (Humanoid  or  Hybrid  Form  Only).  Melee   Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  6   (1d6  +  3)  slashing  damage.  
Longbow  (Humanoid  or  Hybrid  Form  Only).  Ranged   Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  range  150/600  ft.,  one  target.   Hit:  6  (1d8  +  2)  piercing  damage.  
  
Werewolf  
Medium  humanoid  (human,  shapechanger),  chaotic   evil  
Armor  Class  11  in  humanoid  form,  12  (natural  armor)   in  wolf  or  hybrid  form  
Hit  Points  58  (9d8  +  18)  
Speed  30  ft.  (40  ft.  in  wolf  form)  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

328+}  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   13  (+1)   14  (+2)   10  (+0)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)  
Skills  Perception  +4,  Stealth  +3   Damage  Immunities  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and  
slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  not  made  with   silvered  weapons  
Senses  passive  Perception  14   Languages  Common  (can't  speak  in  wolf  form)  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

331-]  
Challenge  3  (700  XP)        Shapechanger.  The  werewolf  can  use  its  action  to   polymorph  into  a  wolf-humanoid  hybrid  or  into  a  wolf,   or  back  into  its  true  form,  which  is  humanoid.  Its   statistics,  other  than  its  AC,  are  the  same  in  each  form.   Any  equipment  it  is  wearing  or  carrying  isn't   transformed.  It  reverts  to  its  true  form  if  it  dies.  
Keen  Hearing  and  Smell.  The  werewolf  has  advantage   on  Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  hearing  or   smell.  
Actions  
Multiattack  (Humanoid  or  Hybrid  Form  Only).  The   werewolf  makes  two  attacks:  one  with  its  bite  and  one   with  its  claws  or  spear.  
Bite  (Wolf  or  Hybrid  Form  Only).  Melee  Weapon   Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  6  (1d8  +  2)   piercing  damage.  If  the  target  is  a  humanoid,  it  must   succeed  on  a  DC  12  Constitution  saving  throw  or  be   cursed  with  werewolf  lycanthropy.  
Claws  (Hybrid  Form  Only).  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4   to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one  creature.  Hit:  7  (2d4  +  2)  slashing   damage.  
Spear  (Humanoid  Form  Only).  Melee  or  Ranged   Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.  or  range  20/60  ft.,   one  creature.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing  damage,  or  6   (1d8  +  2)  piercing  damage  if  used  with  two  hands  to   make  a  melee  attack.  
  
Monsters (M)
  
Magmin  
Small  elemental,  chaotic  neutral  
Armor  Class  14  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  9  (2d6  +  2)  

Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      7  (-2)   15  (+2)   12  (+1)   8  (-1)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)  
Damage  Resistances  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and   slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  
Damage  Immunities  fire   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  Ignan   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)        Death  Burst.  When  the  magmin  dies,  it  explodes  in  a   burst  of  fire  and  magma.  Each  creature  within  10  feet   of  it  must  make  a  DC  11  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking   7  (2d6)  fire  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  Flammable  objects  that   aren't  being  worn  or  carried  in  that  area  are  ignited.   Ignited  Illumination.  As  a  bonus  action,  the  magmin   can  set  itself  ablaze  or  extinguish  its  flames.  While   ablaze,  the  magmin  sheds  bright  light  in  a  10-foot   radius  and  dim  light  for  an  additional  10  feet.  
Actions  
Touch.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (2d6)  fire  damage.  If  the  target  is  a   creature  or  a  flammable  object,  it  ignites.  Until  a   creature  takes  an  action  to  douse  the  fire,  the  target   takes  3  (1d6)  fire  damage  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns.     
Manticore  
Large  monstrosity,  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  14  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  68  (8d10  +  24)   Speed  30  ft.,  fly  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      17  (+3)   16  (+3)   17  (+3)   7  (-2)   12  (+1)   8  (-1)  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  11   Languages  Common   Challenge  3  (700  XP)        Tail  Spike  Regrowth.  The  manticore  has  twenty-four   tail  spikes.  Used  spikes  regrow  when  the  manticore   finishes  a  long  rest.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

329+}  

Actions  
Multiattack.  The  manticore  makes  three  attacks:  one   with  its  bite  and  two  with  its  claws  or  three  with  its  tail   spikes.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (1d8  +  3)  piercing  damage.  
Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  6  (1d6  +  3)  slashing  damage.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

332-]  
Tail  Spike.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  range   100/200  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  7  (1d8  +  3)  piercing   damage.  
  
Medusa  
Medium  monstrosity,  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  15  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  127  (17d8  +  51)  
Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   10  (+0)   15  (+2)   16  (+3)   12  (+1)   13  (+1)   15  (+2)  
Skills  Deception  +5,  Insight  +4,  Perception  +4,  Stealth   +5  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  14  
Languages  Common  
Challenge  6  (2,300  XP)  
    
Petrifying  Gaze.  When  a  creature  that  can  see  the   medusa's  eyes  starts  its  turn  within  30  feet  of  the   medusa,  the  medusa  can  force  it  to  make  a  DC  14   Constitution  saving  throw  if  the  medusa  isn't   incapacitated  and  can  see  the  creature.  If  the  saving   throw  fails  by  5  or  more,  the  creature  is  instantly   petrified.  Otherwise,  a  creature  that  fails  the  save   begins  to  turn  to  stone  and  is  restrained.  The   restrained  creature  must  repeat  the  saving  throw  at   the  end  of  its  next  turn,  becoming  petrified  on  a  failure   or  ending  the  effect  on  a  success.  The  petrification  lasts   until  the  creature  is  freed  by  the  greater  restoration   spell  or  other  magic.  
   Unless  surprised,  a  creature  can  avert  its  eyes  to   avoid  the  saving  throw  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  If  the   creature  does  so,  it  can't  see  the  medusa  until  the  start   of  its  next  turn,  when  it  can  avert  its  eyes  again.  If  the   creature  looks  at  the  medusa  in  the  meantime,  it  must   immediately  make  the  save.      If  the  medusa  sees  itself  reflected  on  a  polished  

surface  within  30  feet  of  it  and  in  an  area  of  bright  light,   the  medusa  is,  due  to  its  curse,  affected  by  its  own   gaze.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  medusa  makes  either  three  melee   attacks--one  with  its  snake  hair  and  two  with  its   shortsword--or  two  ranged  attacks  with  its  longbow.   Snake  Hair.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  creature.  Hit:  4  (1d4  +  2)  piercing  damage  plus  14   (4d6)  poison  damage.   Shortsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing  damage.   Longbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  range   150/600  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  6  (1d8  +  2)  piercing   damage  plus  7  (2d6)  poison  damage.     
Mephits
Dust  Mephit  
Small  elemental,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  17  (5d6)   Speed  30  ft.,  fly  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      5  (-3)   14  (+2)   10  (+0)   9  (-1)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)  
Skills  Perception  +2,  Stealth  +4   Damage  Vulnerabilities  fire   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  12   Languages  Auran,  Terran   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)        Death  Burst.  When  the  mephit  dies,  it  explodes  in  a   burst  of  dust.  Each  creature  within  5  feet  of  it  must   then  succeed  on  a  DC  10  Constitution  saving  throw  or   be  blinded  for  1  minute.  A  blinded  creature  can  repeat   the  saving  throw  on  each  of  its  turns,  ending  the  effect   on  itself  on  a  success.   Innate  Spellcasting  (1/Day).  The  mephit  can  innately   cast  sleep,  requiring  no  material  components.  Its   innate  spellcasting  ability  is  Charisma.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

330+}  

Actions  
Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  4  (1d4  +  2)  slashing  damage.  
Blinding  Breath  (Recharge  6).  The  mephit  exhales  a  15- foot  cone  of  blinding  dust.  Each  creature  in  that  area   must  succeed  on  a  DC  10  Dexterity  saving  throw  or  be   blinded  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat  the  saving   throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  ending  the  effect   on  itself  on  a  success.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

333-]  
  
Ice  Mephit  
Small  elemental,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  11  
Hit  Points  21  (6d6)  
Speed  30  ft.,  fly  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   7  (-2)   13  (+1)   10  (+0)   9  (-1)   11  (+0)   12  (+1)  
Skills  Perception  +2,  Stealth  +3  
Damage  Vulnerabilities  bludgeoning,  fire  
Damage  Immunities  cold,  poison  
Condition  Immunities  poisoned  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  12  
Languages  Aquan,  Auran  
Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)  
    
Death  Burst.  When  the  mephit  dies,  it  explodes  in  a   burst  of  jagged  ice.  Each  creature  within  5  feet  of  it   must  make  a  DC  10  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  4   (1d8)  slashing  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  
False  Appearance.  While  the  mephit  remains   motionless,  it  is  indistinguishable  from  an  ordinary   shard  of  ice.  
Innate  Spellcasting  (1/Day).  The  mephit  can  innately   cast  fog  cloud,  requiring  no  material  components.  Its   innate  spellcasting  ability  is  Charisma.  
Actions  
Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  3  (1d4  +  1)  slashing  damage  plus  2  (1d4)   cold  damage.  
Frost  Breath  (Recharge  6).  The  mephit  exhales  a  15- foot  cone  of  cold  air.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must   succeed  on  a  DC  10  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  5  

(2d4)  cold  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  
   Magma  Mephit  
Small  elemental,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  11  
Hit  Points  22  (5d6  +  5)   Speed  30  ft.,  fly  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      8  (-1)   12  (+1)   12  (+1)   7  (-2)   10  (+0)   10  (+0)  
Skills  Stealth  +3  
Damage  Vulnerabilities  cold   Damage  Immunities  fire,  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  Ignan,  Terran   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)  
     Death  Burst.  When  the  mephit  dies,  it  explodes  in  a   burst  of  lava.  Each  creature  within  5  feet  of  it  must   make  a  DC  11  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  7  (2d6)   fire  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage   on  a  successful  one.  
False  Appearance.  While  the  mephit  remains   motionless,  it  is  indistinguishable  from  an  ordinary   mound  of  magma.  
Innate  Spellcasting  (1/Day).  The  mephit  can  innately   cast  heat  metal  (spell  save  DC  10),  requiring  no   material  components.  Its  innate  spellcasting  ability  is   Charisma.  
Actions  
Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  3  (1d4  +  1)  slashing  damage  plus  2  (1d4)   fire  damage.  
Fire  Breath  (Recharge  6).  The  mephit  exhales  a  15-foot   cone  of  fire.  Each  creature  in  that  area  must  make  a  DC   11  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking  7  (2d6)  fire  damage   on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on  a   successful  one.  
  
Steam  Mephit  
Small  elemental,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  10  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

331+}  

Hit  Points  21  (6d6)   Speed  30  ft.,  fly  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      5  (-3)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)   12  (+1)  
Damage  Immunities  fire,  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

334-]   Languages  Aquan,  Ignan   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)        Death  Burst.  When  the  mephit  dies,  it  explodes  in  a   cloud  of  steam.  Each  creature  within  5  feet  of  the   mephit  must  succeed  on  a  DC  10  Dexterity  saving   throw  or  take  4  (1d8)  fire  damage.   Innate  Spellcasting  (1/Day).  The  mephit  can  innately   cast  blur,  requiring  no  material  components.  Its  innate   spellcasting  ability  is  Charisma.  
Actions  
Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  2  (1d4)  slashing  damage  plus  2  (1d4)  fire   damage.   Steam  Breath  (Recharge  6).  The  mephit  exhales  a  15- foot  cone  of  scalding  steam.  Each  creature  in  that  area   must  succeed  on  a  DC  10  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking   4  (1d8)  fire  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.     
Merfolk  
Medium  humanoid  (merfolk),  neutral  
Armor  Class  11   Hit  Points  11  (2d8  +  2)   Speed  10  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      10  (+0)   13  (+1)   12  (+1)   11  (+0)   11  (+0)   12  (+1)  
Skills  Perception  +2   Senses  passive  Perception  12   Languages  Aquan,  Common   Challenge  1/8  (25  XP)        Amphibious.  The  merfolk  can  breathe  air  and  water.  

Actions  
Spear.  Melee  or  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit,   reach  5  ft.  or  range  20/60  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  3  (1d6)   piercing  damage,  or  4  (1d8)  piercing  damage  if  used   with  two  hands  to  make  a  melee  attack.     
Merrow  
Large  monstrosity,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  45  (6d10  +  12)   Speed  10  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   10  (+0)   15  (+2)   8  (-1)   10  (+0)   9  (-1)  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  Abyssal,  Aquan   Challenge  2  (450  XP)        Amphibious.  The  merrow  can  breathe  air  and  water.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  merrow  makes  two  attacks:  one  with   its  bite  and  one  with  its  claws  or  harpoon.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  8  (1d8  +  4)  piercing  damage.   Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  9  (2d4  +  4)  slashing  damage.   Harpoon.  Melee  or  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,   reach  5  ft.  or  range  20/60  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +   4)  piercing  damage.  If  the  target  is  a  Huge  or  smaller   creature,  it  must  succeed  on  a  Strength  contest  against   the  merrow  or  be  pulled  up  to  20  feet  toward  the   merrow.     
Mimic  
Medium  monstrosity  (shapechanger),  neutral  
Armor  Class  12  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  58  (9d8  +  18)   Speed  15  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      17  (+3)   12  (+1)   15  (+2)   5  (-3)   13  (+1)   8  (-1)  
Skills  Stealth  +5   Damage  Immunities  acid  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

332+}  

Condition  Immunities  prone   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  11   Languages  --   Challenge  2  (450  XP)        Shapechanger.  The  mimic  can  use  its  action  to   polymorph  into  an  object  or  back  into  its  true,   amorphous  form.  Its  statistics  are  the  same  in  each  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

335-]   form.  Any  equipment  it  is  wearing  or  carrying  isn't   transformed.  It  reverts  to  its  true  form  if  it  dies.   Adhesive  (Object  Form  Only).  The  mimic  adheres  to   anything  that  touches  it.  A  Huge  or  smaller  creature   adhered  to  the  mimic  is  also  grappled  by  it  (escape  DC   13).  Ability  checks  made  to  escape  this  grapple  have   disadvantage.   False  Appearance  (Object  Form  Only).  While  the  mimic   remains  motionless,  it  is  indistinguishable  from  an   ordinary  object.   Grappler.  The  mimic  has  advantage  on  attack  rolls   against  any  creature  grappled  by  it.  
Actions  
Pseudopod.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  7  (1d8  +  3)  bludgeoning  damage.  If   the  mimic  is  in  object  form,  the  target  is  subjected  to   its  Adhesive  trait.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (1d8  +  3)  piercing  damage  plus  4  (1d8)   acid  damage.     
Minotaur  
Large  monstrosity,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  14  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  76  (9d10  +  27)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   11  (+0)   16  (+3)   6  (-2)   16  (+3)   9  (-1)  
Skills  Perception  +7   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  17   Languages  Abyssal   Challenge  3  (700  XP)        Charge.  If  the  minotaur  moves  at  least  10  feet  straight   toward  a  target  and  then  hits  it  with  a  gore  attack  on  

the  same  turn,  the  target  takes  an  extra  9  (2d8)   piercing  damage.  If  the  target  is  a  creature,  it  must   succeed  on  a  DC  14  Strength  saving  throw  or  be   pushed  up  to  10  feet  away  and  knocked  prone.   Labyrinthine  Recall.  The  minotaur  can  perfectly  recall   any  path  it  has  traveled.   Reckless.  At  the  start  of  its  turn,  the  minotaur  can  gain   advantage  on  all  melee  weapon  attack  rolls  it  makes   during  that  turn,  but  attack  rolls  against  it  have   advantage  until  the  start  of  its  next  turn.  
Actions  
Greataxe.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  17  (2d12  +  4)  slashing  damage.   Gore.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  13  (2d8  +  4)  piercing  damage.     
Mummies
Mummy  
Medium  undead, lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  11  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  58  (9d8  +  18)   Speed  20  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      16  (+3)   8  (-1)   15  (+2)   6  (-2)   10  (+0)   12  (+1)  
Saving  Throws  Wis  +2   Damage  Vulnerabilities  fire   Damage  Resistances  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and  
slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks   Damage  Immunities  necrotic,  poison   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  exhaustion,  frightened,  
paralyzed,  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  the  languages  it  knew  in  life   Challenge  3  (700  XP)  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  mummy  can  use  its  Dreadful  Glare   and  makes  one  attack  with  its  rotting  fist.   Rotting  Fist.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  10  (2d6  +  3)  bludgeoning  damage   plus  10  (3d6)  necrotic  damage.  If  the  target  is  a   creature,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  12  Constitution   saving  throw  or  be  cursed  with  mummy  rot.  The  cursed  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

333+}  

target  can't  regain  hit  points,  and  its  hit  point   maximum  decreases  by  10  (3d6)  for  every  24  hours   that  elapse.  If  the  curse  reduces  the  target's  hit  point   maximum  to  0,  the  target  dies,  and  its  body  turns  to   dust.  The  curse  lasts  until  removed  by  the  remove   curse  spell  or  other  magic.  
Dreadful  Glare.  The  mummy  targets  one  creature  it   can  see  within  60  feet  of  it.  If  the  target  can  see  the  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

336-]   mummy,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  11  Wisdom  saving   throw  against  this  magic  or  become  frightened  until   the  end  of  the  mummy's  next  turn.  If  the  target  fails   the  saving  throw  by  5  or  more,  it  is  also  paralyzed  for   the  same  duration.  A  target  that  succeeds  on  the   saving  throw  is  immune  to  the  Dreadful  Glare  of  all   mummies  (but  not  mummy  lords)  for  the  next  24  hours.  
  
Mummy  Lord  
Medium  undead,  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  97  (13d8  +  39)  
Speed  20  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   18  (+4)   10  (+0)   17  (+3)   11  (+0)   18  (+4)   16  (+3)  
Saving  Throws  Con  +8,  Int  +5,  Wis  +9,  Cha  +8  
Skills  History  +5,  Religion  +5  
Damage  Vulnerabilities  fire  
Damage  Immunities  necrotic,  poison;  bludgeoning,   piercing,  and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  
Condition  Immunities  charmed,  exhaustion,  frightened,   paralyzed,  poisoned  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  14  
Languages  the  languages  it  knew  in  life  
Challenge  15  (13,000  XP)  
    
Magic  Resistance.  The  mummy  lord  has  advantage  on   saving  throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Rejuvenation.  A  destroyed  mummy  lord  gains  a  new   body  in  24  hours  if  its  heart  is  intact,  regaining  all  its  hit   points  and  becoming  active  again.  The  new  body   appears  within  5  feet  of  the  mummy  lord's  heart.  
Spellcasting.  The  mummy  lord  is  a  10th-level   spellcaster.  Its  spellcasting  ability  is  Wisdom  (spell  save   DC  17,  +9  to  hit  with  spell  attacks).  The  mummy  lord   has  the  following  cleric  spells  prepared:  
Cantrips  (at  will):  sacred  flame,  thaumaturgy  

1st  level  (4  slots):  command,  guiding  bolt,  shield  of   faith  
2nd  level  (3  slots):  hold  person,  silence,  spiritual   weapon  
3rd  level  (3  slots):  animate  dead,  dispel  magic  
4th  level  (3  slots):  divination,  guardian  of  faith  
5th  level  (2  slots):  contagion,  insect  plague  
6th  level  (1  slot):  harm  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  mummy  can  use  its  Dreadful  Glare   and  makes  one  attack  with  its  rotting  fist.  
Rotting  Fist.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  14  (3d6  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage   plus  21  (6d6)  necrotic  damage.  If  the  target  is  a   creature,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  16  Constitution   saving  throw  or  be  cursed  with  mummy  rot.  The  cursed   target  can't  regain  hit  points,  and  its  hit  point   maximum  decreases  by  10  (3d6)  for  every  24  hours   that  elapse.  If  the  curse  reduces  the  target's  hit  point   maximum  to  0,  the  target  dies,  and  its  body  turns  to   dust.  The  curse  lasts  until  removed  by  the  remove   curse  spell  or  other  magic.  
Dreadful  Glare.  The  mummy  lord  targets  one  creature   it  can  see  within  60  feet  of  it.  If  the  target  can  see  the   mummy  lord,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  16  Wisdom   saving  throw  against  this  magic  or  become  frightened   until  the  end  of  the  mummy's  next  turn.  If  the  target   fails  the  saving  throw  by  5  or  more,  it  is  also  paralyzed   for  the  same  duration.  A  target  that  succeeds  on  the   saving  throw  is  immune  to  the  Dreadful  Glare  of  all   mummies  and  mummy  lords  for  the  next  24  hours.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  mummy  lord  can  take  3  legendary  actions,   choosing  from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary   action  option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end   of  another  creature's  turn.  The  mummy  lord  regains   spent  legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Attack.  The  mummy  lord  makes  one  attack  with  its   rotting  fist  or  uses  its  Dreadful  Glare.  
Blinding  Dust.  Blinding  dust  and  sand  swirls  magically   around  the  mummy  lord.  Each  creature  within  5  feet   of  the  mummy  lord  must  succeed  on  a  DC  16   Constitution  saving  throw  or  be  blinded  until  the  end   of  the  creature's  next  turn.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

334+}  

Blasphemous  Word  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  mummy   lord  utters  a  blasphemous  word.  Each  non-undead   creature  within  10  feet  of  the  mummy  lord  that  can   hear  the  magical  utterance  must  succeed  on  a  DC  16   Constitution  saving  throw  or  be  stunned  until  the   end  of  the  mummy  lord's  next  turn.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

337-]  
Channel  Negative  Energy  (Costs  2  Actions).  The   mummy  lord  magically  unleashes  negative  energy.   Creatures  within  60  feet  of  the  mummy  lord,   including  ones  behind  barriers  and  around  corners,   can't  regain  hit  points  until  the  end  of  the  mummy   lord's  next  turn.  
Whirlwind  of  Sand  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  mummy  lord   magically  transforms  into  a  whirlwind  of  sand,  moves   up  to  60  feet,  and  reverts  to  its  normal  form.  While   in  whirlwind  form,  the  mummy  lord  is  immune  to  all   damage,  and  it  can't  be  grappled,  petrified,  knocked   prone,  restrained,  or  stunned.  Equipment  worn  or   carried  by  the  mummy  lord  remain  in  its  possession.  
  
Monsters (N)
  
Nagas
Guardian  Naga  
Large  monstrosity,  lawful  good  
Armor  Class  18  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  127  (15d10  +  45)  
Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   18  (+4)   16  (+3)   16  (+3)   19  (+4)   18  (+4)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +8,  Con  +7,  Int  +7,  Wis  +8,  Cha  +8   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  poisoned  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  14   Languages  Celestial,  Common   Challenge  10  (5,900  XP)  
     Rejuvenation.  If  it  dies,  the  naga  returns  to  life  in  1d6   days  and  regains  all  its  hit  points.  Only  a  wish  spell  can   prevent  this  trait  from  functioning.  
Spellcasting.  The  naga  is  an  11th-level  spellcaster.  Its   spellcasting  ability  is  Wisdom  (spell  save  DC  16,  +8  to   hit  with  spell  attacks),  and  it  needs  only  verbal  

components  to  cast  its  spells.  It  has  the  following  cleric   spells  prepared:   Cantrips  (at  will):  mending,  sacred  flame,  thaumaturgy   1st  level  (4  slots):  command,  cure  wounds,  shield  of  
faith   2nd  level  (3  slots):  calm  emotions,  hold  person   3rd  level  (3  slots):  bestow  curse,  clairvoyance   4th  level  (3  slots):  banishment,  freedom  of  movement   5th  level  (2  slots):  flame  strike,  geas   6th  level  (1  slot):  true  seeing  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  8  (1d8  +  4)  piercing  damage,  and  the   target  must  make  a  DC  15  Constitution  saving  throw,   taking  45  (10d8)  poison  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or   half  as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.   Spit  Poison.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  range   15/30  ft.,  one  creature.  Hit:  The  target  must  make  a  DC   15  Constitution  saving  throw,  taking  45  (10d8)  poison   damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on  a   successful  one.  
   Spirit  Naga  
Large  monstrosity,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  15  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  75  (10d10  +  20)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   17  (+3)   14  (+2)   16  (+3)   15  (+2)   16  (+3)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +6,  Con  +5,  Wis  +5,  Cha  +6   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  12   Languages  Abyssal,  Common   Challenge  8  (3,900  XP)        Rejuvenation.  If  it  dies,  the  naga  returns  to  life  in  1d6   days  and  regains  all  its  hit  points.  Only  a  wish  spell  can   prevent  this  trait  from  functioning.   Spellcasting.  The  naga  is  a  10th-level  spellcaster.  Its   spellcasting  ability  is  Intelligence  (spell  save  DC  14,  +6   to  hit  with  spell  attacks),  and  it  needs  only  verbal  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

335+}  

components  to  cast  its  spells.  It  has  the  following   wizard  spells  prepared:   Cantrips  (at  will):  mage  hand,  minor  illusion,  ray  of  
frost   1st  level  (4  slots):  charm  person,  detect  magic,  sleep   2nd  level  (3  slots):  detect  thoughts,  hold  person  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

338-]   3rd  level  (3  slots):  lightning  bolt,  water  breathing   4th  level  (3  slots):  blight,  dimension  door   5th  level  (2  slots):  dominate  person  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  7  (1d6  +  4)  piercing  damage,  and  the   target  must  make  a  DC  13  Constitution  saving  throw,   taking  31  (7d8)  poison  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half   as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.     
Nightmare  
Large  fiend,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  68  (8d10  +  24)   Speed  60  ft.,  fly  90  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   15  (+2)   16  (+3)   10  (+0)   13  (+1)   15  (+2)  
Damage  Immunities  fire   Senses  passive  Perception  11   Languages  understands  Abyssal,  Common,  and  Infernal  
but  can't  speak   Challenge  3  (700  XP)      Confer  Fire  Resistance.  The  nightmare  can  grant   resistance  to  fire  damage  to  anyone  riding  it.   Illumination.  The  nightmare  sheds  bright  light  in  a  10- foot  radius  and  dim  light  for  an  additional  10  feet.  
Actions  
Hooves.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  13  (2d8  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage  plus   7  (2d6)  fire  damage.   Ethereal  Stride.  The  nightmare  and  up  to  three  willing   creatures  within  5  feet  of  it  magically  enter  the   Ethereal  Plane  from  the  Material  Plane,  or  vice  versa.     

Monsters (O)
  
Ogre  
Large  giant,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  11  (hide  armor)   Hit  Points  59  (7d10  +  21)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   8  (-1)   16  (+3)   5  (-3)   7  (-2)   7  (-2)  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  8   Languages  Common,  Giant   Challenge  2  (450  XP)  
Actions  
Greatclub.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  13  (2d8  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.   Javelin.  Melee  or  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,   reach  5  ft.  or  range  30/120  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  11  (2d6   +  4)  piercing  damage.     
Oni  
Large  giant,  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  16  (chain  mail)   Hit  Points  110  (13d10  +  39)   Speed  30  ft.,  fly  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   11  (+0)   16  (+3)   14  (+2)   12  (+1)   15  (+2)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +3,  Con  +6,  Wis  +4,  Cha  +5   Skills  Arcana  +5,  Deception  +8,  Perception  +4   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  14   Languages  Common,  Giant   Challenge  7  (2,900  XP)        Innate  Spellcasting.  The  oni's  innate  spellcasting  ability   is  Charisma  (spell  save  DC  13).  The  oni  can  innately  cast   the  following  spells,  requiring  no  material  components:   At  will:  darkness,  invisibility   1/day  each:  charm  person,  cone  of  cold,  gaseous  form,  
sleep   Magic  Weapons.  The  oni's  weapon  attacks  are  magical.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

336+}  

Regeneration.  The  oni  regains  10  hit  points  at  the  start   of  its  turn  if  it  has  at  least  1  hit  point.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  oni  makes  two  attacks,  either  with  its   claws  or  its  glaive.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

339-]  
Claw  (Oni  Form  Only).  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,   reach  5  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  8  (1d8  +  4)  slashing  damage.  
Glaive.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  15  (2d10  +  4)  slashing  damage,  or  9   (1d10  +  4)  slashing  damage  in  Small  or  Medium  form.  
Change  Shape.  The  oni  magically  polymorphs  into  a   Small  or  Medium  humanoid,  into  a  Large  giant,  or  back   into  its  true  form.  Other  than  its  size,  its  statistics  are   the  same  in  each  form.  The  only  equipment  that  is   transformed  is  its  glaive,  which  shrinks  so  that  it  can  be   wielded  in  humanoid  form.  If  the  oni  dies,  it  reverts  to   its  true  form,  and  its  glaive  reverts  to  its  normal  size.  
  
Oozes
Black  Pudding  
Large  ooze,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  7  
Hit  Points  85  (10d10  +  30)   Speed  20  ft.,  climb  20  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      16  (+3)   5  (-3)   16  (+3)   1  (-5)   6  (-2)   1  (-5)  
Damage  Immunities  acid,  cold,  lightning,  slashing   Condition  Immunities  blinded,  charmed,  deafened,  
exhaustion,  frightened,  prone   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.  (blind  beyond  this  radius),  
passive  Perception  8  
Languages  --   Challenge  4  (1,100  XP)       
Amorphous.  The  pudding  can  move  through  a  space  as   narrow  as  1  inch  wide  without  squeezing.  
Corrosive  Form.  A  creature  that  touches  the  pudding  or   hits  it  with  a  melee  attack  while  within  5  feet  of  it  takes   4  (1d8)  acid  damage.  Any  nonmagical  weapon  made  of   metal  or  wood  that  hits  the  pudding  corrodes.  After   dealing  damage,  the  weapon  takes  a  permanent  and   cumulative  -1  penalty  to  damage  rolls.  If  its  penalty   drops  to  -5,  the  weapon  is  destroyed.  Nonmagical  

ammunition  made  of  metal  or  wood  that  hits  the   pudding  is  destroyed  after  dealing  damage.      The  pudding  can  eat  through  2-inch-thick,   nonmagical  wood  or  metal  in  1  round.  
Spider  Climb.  The  pudding  can  climb  difficult  surfaces,   including  upside  down  on  ceilings,  without  needing  to   make  an  ability  check.  
Actions  
Pseudopod.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  6  (1d6  +  3)  bludgeoning  damage   plus  18  (4d8)  acid  damage.  In  addition,  nonmagical   armor  worn  by  the  target  is  partly  dissolved  and  takes   a  permanent  and  cumulative  -1  penalty  to  the  AC  it   offers.  The  armor  is  destroyed  if  the  penalty  reduces  its   AC  to  10.  
Reactions  
Split.  When  a  pudding  that  is  Medium  or  larger  is   subjected  to  lightning  or  slashing  damage,  it  splits  into   two  new  puddings  if  it  has  at  least  10  hit  points.  Each   new  pudding  has  hit  points  equal  to  half  the  original   pudding's,  rounded  down.  New  puddings  are  one  size   smaller  than  the  original  pudding.  
  
Gelatinous  Cube  
Large  ooze,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  6  
Hit  Points  84  (8d10  +  40)  
Speed  15  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   14  (+2)   3  (-4)   20  (+5)   1  (-5)   6  (-2)   1  (-5)  
Condition  Immunities  blinded,  charmed,  deafened,   exhaustion,  frightened,  prone  
Senses  blindsight  60  ft.  (blind  beyond  this  radius),   passive  Perception  8  
Languages  --  
Challenge  2  (450  XP)  
    
Ooze  Cube.  The  cube  takes  up  its  entire  space.  Other   creatures  can  enter  the  space,  but  a  creature  that  does   so  is  subjected  to  the  cube's  Engulf  and  has   disadvantage  on  the  saving  throw.      Creatures  inside  the  cube  can  be  seen  but  have  total   cover.      A  creature  within  5  feet  of  the  cube  can  take  an  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

337+}  

action  to  pull  a  creature  or  object  out  of  the  cube.   Doing  so  requires  a  successful  DC  12  Strength  check,   and  the  creature  making  the  attempt  takes  10  (3d6)   acid  damage.      The  cube  can  hold  only  one  Large  creature  or  up  to   four  Medium  or  smaller  creatures  inside  it  at  a  time.  
Transparent.  Even  when  the  cube  is  in  plain  sight,  it   takes  a  successful  DC  15  Wisdom  (Perception)  check  to  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

340-]   spot  a  cube  that  has  neither  moved  nor  attacked.  A   creature  that  tries  to  enter  the  cube's  space  while   unaware  of  the  cube  is  surprised  by  the  cube.  
Actions  
Pseudopod.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  creature.  Hit:  10  (3d6)  acid  damage.  
Engulf.  The  cube  moves  up  to  its  speed.  While  doing  so,   it  can  enter  Large  or  smaller  creatures'  spaces.   Whenever  the  cube  enters  a  creature's  space,  the   creature  must  make  a  DC  12  Dexterity  saving  throw.      On  a  successful  save,  the  creature  can  choose  to  be   pushed  5  feet  back  or  to  the  side  of  the  cube.  A   creature  that  chooses  not  to  be  pushed  suffers  the   consequences  of  a  failed  saving  throw.      On  a  failed  save,  the  cube  enters  the  creature's   space,  and  the  creature  takes  10  (3d6)  acid  damage   and  is  engulfed.  The  engulfed  creature  can't  breathe,  is   restrained,  and  takes  21  (6d6)  acid  damage  at  the  start   of  each  of  the  cube's  turns.  When  the  cube  moves,  the   engulfed  creature  moves  with  it.      An  engulfed  creature  can  try  to  escape  by  taking  an   action  to  make  a  DC  12  Strength  check.  On  a  success,   the  creature  escapes  and  enters  a  space  of  its  choice   within  5  feet  of  the  cube.  
  
Gray  Ooze  
Medium  ooze,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  8  
Hit  Points  22  (3d8  +  9)  
Speed  10  ft.,  climb  10  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   12  (+1)   6  (-2)   16  (+3)   1  (-5)   6  (-2)   2  (-4)  
Skills  Stealth  +2  
Damage  Resistances  acid,  cold,  fire  
Condition  Immunities  blinded,  charmed,  deafened,   exhaustion,  frightened,  prone  

Senses  blindsight  60  ft.  (blind  beyond  this  radius),   passive  Perception  8  
Languages  --   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)       
Amorphous.  The  ooze  can  move  through  a  space  as   narrow  as  1  inch  wide  without  squeezing.  
Corrode  Metal.  Any  nonmagical  weapon  made  of   metal  that  hits  the  ooze  corrodes.  After  dealing   damage,  the  weapon  takes  a  permanent  and   cumulative  -1  penalty  to  damage  rolls.  If  its  penalty   drops  to  -5,  the  weapon  is  destroyed.  Nonmagical   ammunition  made  of  metal  that  hits  the  ooze  is   destroyed  after  dealing  damage.      The  ooze  can  eat  through  2-inch-thick,  nonmagical   metal  in  1  round.  
False  Appearance.  While  the  ooze  remains  motionless,   it  is  indistinguishable  from  an  oily  pool  or  wet  rock.  
Actions  
Pseudopod.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  4  (1d6  +  1)  bludgeoning  damage   plus  7  (2d6)  acid  damage,  and  if  the  target  is  wearing   nonmagical  metal  armor,  its  armor  is  partly  corroded   and  takes  a  permanent  and  cumulative  -1  penalty  to   the  AC  it  offers.  The  armor  is  destroyed  if  the  penalty   reduces  its  AC  to  10.  
  
Ochre  Jelly  
Large  ooze,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  8  
Hit  Points  45  (6d10  +  12)   Speed  10  ft.,  climb  10  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   6  (-2)   14  (+2)   2  (-4)   6  (-2)   1  (-5)  
Damage  Resistances  acid   Damage  Immunities  lightning,  slashing   Condition  Immunities  blinded,  charmed,  deafened,  
exhaustion,  frightened,  prone  
Senses  blindsight  60  ft.  (blind  beyond  this  radius),   passive  Perception  8  
Languages  --   Challenge  2  (450  XP)  
    

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

338+}  

Amorphous.  The  jelly  can  move  through  a  space  as   narrow  as  1  inch  wide  without  squeezing.   Spider  Climb.  The  jelly  can  climb  difficult  surfaces,   including  upside  down  on  ceilings,  without  needing  to   make  an  ability  check.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

341-]  
Actions  
Pseudopod.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  9  (2d6  +  2)  bludgeoning  damage   plus  3  (1d6)  acid  damage.  
Reactions  
Split.  When  a  jelly  that  is  Medium  or  larger  is  subjected   to  lightning  or  slashing  damage,  it  splits  into  two  new   jellies  if  it  has  at  least  10  hit  points.  Each  new  jelly  has   hit  points  equal  to  half  the  original  jelly's,  rounded   down.  New  jellies  are  one  size  smaller  than  the  original   jelly.     
Orc  
Medium  humanoid  (orc),  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  13  (hide  armor)   Hit  Points  15  (2d8  +  6)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      16  (+3)   12  (+1)   16  (+3)   7  (-2)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)  
Skills  Intimidation  +2   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  Common,  Orc   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)        Aggressive.  As  a  bonus  action,  the  orc  can  move  up  to   its  speed  toward  a  hostile  creature  that  it  can  see.  
Actions  
Greataxe.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  9  (1d12  +  3)  slashing  damage.   Javelin.  Melee  or  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,   reach  5  ft.  or  range  30/120  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  6  (1d6  +   3)  piercing  damage.     
Otyugh  
Large  aberration,  neutral  
Armor  Class  14  (natural  armor)  

Hit  Points  114  (12d10  +  48)  
Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   16  (+3)   11  (+0)   19  (+4)   6  (-2)   13  (+1)   6  (-2)  
Saving  Throws  Con  +7  
Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  11  
Languages  Otyugh  
Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)  
    
Limited  Telepathy.  The  otyugh  can  magically  transmit   simple  messages  and  images  to  any  creature  within   120  feet  of  it  that  can  understand  a  language.  This   form  of  telepathy  doesn't  allow  the  receiving  creature   to  telepathically  respond.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  otyugh  makes  three  attacks:  one  with   its  bite  and  two  with  its  tentacles.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  12  (2d8  +  3)  piercing  damage.  If  the  target  is   a  creature,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  15  Constitution   saving  throw  against  disease  or  become  poisoned  until   the  disease  is  cured.  Every  24  hours  that  elapse,  the   target  must  repeat  the  saving  throw,  reducing  its  hit   point  maximum  by  5  (1d10)  on  a  failure.  The  disease  is   cured  on  a  success.  The  target  dies  if  the  disease   reduces  its  hit  point  maximum  to  0.  This  reduction  to   the  target's  hit  point  maximum  lasts  until  the  disease  is   cured.  
Tentacle.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  7  (1d8  +  3)  bludgeoning  damage  plus  4   (1d8)  piercing  damage.  If  the  target  is  Medium  or   smaller,  it  is  grappled  (escape  DC  13)  and  restrained   until  the  grapple  ends.  The  otyugh  has  two  tentacles,   each  of  which  can  grapple  one  target.  
Tentacle  Slam.  The  otyugh  slams  creatures  grappled  by   it  into  each  other  or  a  solid  surface.  Each  creature  must   succeed  on  a  DC  14  Constitution  saving  throw  or  take   10  (2d6  +  3)  bludgeoning  damage  and  be  stunned  until   the  end  of  the  otyugh's  next  turn.  On  a  successful  save,   the  target  takes  half  the  bludgeoning  damage  and  isn't   stunned.  
  
Owlbear  
Large  monstrosity,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

339+}  

Hit  Points  59  (7d10  +  21)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      20  (+5)   12  (+1)   17  (+3)   3  (-4)   12  (+1)   7  (-2)  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

342-]  
Skills  Perception  +3   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  3  (700  XP)        Keen  Sight  and  Smell.  The  owlbear  has  advantage  on   Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  sight  or  smell.  
Actions   Multiattack.  The  owlbear  makes  two  attacks:  one  with   its  beak  and  one  with  its  claws.   Beak.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  10  (1d10  +  5)  piercing  damage.   Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  14  (2d8  +  5)  slashing  damage.     
Monsters (P)
  
Pegasus  
Large  celestial,  chaotic  good  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  59  (7d10  +  21)   Speed  60  ft.,  fly  90  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   15  (+2)   16  (+3)   10  (+0)   15  (+2)   13  (+1)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +4,  Wis  +4,  Cha  +3   Skills  Perception  +6   Senses  passive  Perception  16   Languages  understands  Celestial,  Common,  Elvish,  and  
Sylvan  but  can't  speak   Challenge  2  (450  XP)  
Actions   Hooves.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.     

Pseudodragon  
Tiny  dragon,  neutral  good  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  7  (2d4  +  2)   Speed  15  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      6  (-2)   15  (+2)   13  (+1)   10  (+0)   12  (+1)   10  (+0)  
Skills  Perception  +3,  Stealth  +4   Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  
Perception  13   Languages  understands  Common  and  Draconic  but  
can't  speak   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)        Keen  Senses.  The  pseudodragon  has  advantage  on   Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  sight,  hearing,   or  smell.   Magic  Resistance.  The  pseudodragon  has  advantage   on  saving  throws  against  spells  and  other  magical   effects.   Limited  Telepathy.  The  pseudodragon  can  magically   communicate  simple  ideas,  emotions,  and  images   telepathically  with  any  creature  within  100  feet  of  it   that  can  understand  a  language.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  4  (1d4  +  2)  piercing  damage.   Sting.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  4  (1d4  +  2)  piercing  damage,  and  the   target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  11  Constitution  saving   throw  or  become  poisoned  for  1  hour.  If  the  saving   throw  fails  by  5  or  more,  the  target  falls  unconscious   for  the  same  duration,  or  until  it  takes  damage  or   another  creature  uses  an  action  to  shake  it  awake.     
Purple  Worm  
Gargantuan  monstrosity,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  18  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  247  (15d20  +  90)   Speed  50  ft.,  burrow  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      28  (+9)   7  (-2)   22  (+6)   1  (-5)   8  (-1)   4  (-3)  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

340+}  

Saving  Throws  Con  +11,  Wis  +4  
Senses  blindsight  30  ft.,  tremorsense  60  ft.,  passive   Perception  9  
Languages  --  
Challenge  15  (13,000  XP)       

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

343-]  
    
Tunneler.  The  worm  can  burrow  through  solid  rock  at   half  its  burrow  speed  and  leaves  a  10-foot-diameter   tunnel  in  its  wake.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  worm  makes  two  attacks:  one  with  its   bite  and  one  with  its  stinger.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  22  (3d8  +  9)  piercing  damage.  If  the  target  is   a  Large  or  smaller  creature,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  19   Dexterity  saving  throw  or  be  swallowed  by  the  worm.  A   swallowed  creature  is  blinded  and  restrained,  it  has   total  cover  against  attacks  and  other  effects  outside   the  worm,  and  it  takes  21  (6d6)  acid  damage  at  the   start  of  each  of  the  worm's  turns.      If  the  worm  takes  30  damage  or  more  on  a  single   turn  from  a  creature  inside  it,  the  worm  must  succeed   on  a  DC  21  Constitution  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  that   turn  or  regurgitate  all  swallowed  creatures,  which  fall   prone  in  a  space  within  10  feet  of  the  worm.  If  the   worm  dies,  a  swallowed  creature  is  no  longer   restrained  by  it  and  can  escape  from  the  corpse  by   using  20  feet  of  movement,  exiting  prone.  
Tail  Stinger.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  reach  10   ft.,  one  creature.  Hit:  19  (3d6  +  9)  piercing  damage,  and   the  target  must  make  a  DC  19  Constitution  saving   throw,  taking  42  (12d6)  poison  damage  on  a  failed  save,   or  half  as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.  
  
Monsters (R)
  
Rakshasa  
Medium  fiend,  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  16  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  110  (13d8  +  52)  
Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   14  (+2)   17  (+3)   18  (+4)   13  (+1)   16  (+3)   20  (+5)  

Skills  Deception  +10,  Insight  +8  
Damage  Vulnerabilities  piercing  from  magic  weapons   wielded  by  good  creatures  
Damage  Immunities  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and   slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  13  
Languages  Common,  Infernal  
Challenge  13  (10,000  XP)  
    
Limited  Magic  Immunity.  The  rakshasa  can't  be   affected  or  detected  by  spells  of  6th  level  or  lower   unless  it  wishes  to  be.  It  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  all  other  spells  and  magical  effects.  
Innate  Spellcasting.  The  rakshasa's  innate  spellcasting   ability  is  Charisma  (spell  save  DC  18,  +10  to  hit  with   spell  attacks).  The  rakshasa  can  innately  cast  the   following  spells,  requiring  no  material  components:  
At  will:  detect  thoughts,  disguise  self,  mage  hand,   minor  illusion  
3/day  each:  charm  person,  detect  magic,  invisibility,   major  image,  suggestion  
1/day  each:  dominate  person,  fly,  plane  shift,  true   seeing  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  rakshasa  makes  two  claw  attacks.  
Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  9  (2d6  +  2)  slashing  damage,  and  the  target   is  cursed  if  it  is  a  creature.  The  magical  curse  takes   effect  whenever  the  target  takes  a  short  or  long  rest,   filling  the  target's  thoughts  with  horrible  images  and   dreams.  The  cursed  target  gains  no  benefit  from   finishing  a  short  or  long  rest.  The  curse  lasts  until  it  is   lifted  by  a  remove  curse  spell  or  similar  magic.  
  
Remorhaz  
Huge  monstrosity,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  195  (17d12  +  85)  
Speed  30  ft.,  burrow  20  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   24  (+7)   13  (+1)   21  (+5)   4  (-3)   10  (+0)   5  (-3)  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

341+}  

Damage  Immunities  cold,  fire  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  tremorsense  60  ft.,  passive   Perception  10  
Languages  --  
Challenge  11  (7,200  XP)       

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

344-]  
    
Heated  Body.  A  creature  that  touches  the  remorhaz  or   hits  it  with  a  melee  attack  while  within  5  feet  of  it  takes   10  (3d6)  fire  damage.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +11  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  40  (6d10  +  7)  piercing  damage  plus  10   (3d6)  fire  damage.  If  the  target  is  a  creature,  it  is   grappled  (escape  DC  17).  Until  this  grapple  ends,  the   target  is  restrained,  and  the  remorhaz  can't  bite   another  target.  
Swallow.  The  remorhaz  makes  one  bite  attack  against   a  Medium  or  smaller  creature  it  is  grappling.  If  the   attack  hits,  that  creature  takes  the  bite's  damage  and  is   swallowed,  and  the  grapple  ends.  While  swallowed,  the   creature  is  blinded  and  restrained,  it  has  total  cover   against  attacks  and  other  effects  outside  the  remorhaz,   and  it  takes  21  (6d6)  acid  damage  at  the  start  of  each   of  the  remorhaz's  turns.      If  the  remorhaz  takes  30  damage  or  more  on  a  single   turn  from  a  creature  inside  it,  the  remorhaz  must   succeed  on  a  DC  15  Constitution  saving  throw  at  the   end  of  that  turn  or  regurgitate  all  swallowed  creatures,   which  fall  prone  in  a  space  within  10  feet  of  the   remorhaz.  If  the  remorhaz  dies,  a  swallowed  creature  is   no  longer  restrained  by  it  and  can  escape  from  the   corpse  using  15  feet  of  movement,  exiting  prone.  
  
Roc  
Gargantuan  monstrosity,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  15  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  248  (16d20  +  80)  
Speed  20  ft.,  fly  120  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   28  (+9)   10  (+0)   20  (+5)   3  (-4)   10  (+0)   9  (-1)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +4,  Con  +9,  Wis  +4,  Cha  +3  
Skills  Perception  +4  
Senses  passive  Perception  14  
Languages  --  

Challenge  11  (7,200  XP)        Keen  Sight.  The  roc  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  sight.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  roc  makes  two  attacks:  one  with  its   beak  and  one  with  its  talons.  
Beak.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +13  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  27  (4d8  +  9)  piercing  damage.  
Talons.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +13  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  23  (4d6  +  9)  slashing  damage,  and  the   target  is  grappled  (escape  DC  19).  Until  this  grapple   ends,  the  target  is  restrained,  and  the  roc  can't  use  its   talons  on  another  target.  
  
Roper  
Large  monstrosity,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  20  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  93  (11d10  +  33)  
Speed  10  ft.,  climb  10  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   8  (-1)   17  (+3)   7  (-2)   16  (+3)   6  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +6,  Stealth  +5  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  16   Languages  --   Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)  
     False  Appearance.  While  the  roper  remains  motionless,   it  is  indistinguishable  from  a  normal  cave  formation,   such  as  a  stalagmite.  
Grasping  Tendrils.  The  roper  can  have  up  to  six  tendrils   at  a  time.  Each  tendril  can  be  attacked  (AC  20;  10  hit   points;  immunity  to  poison  and  psychic  damage).   Destroying  a  tendril  deals  no  damage  to  the  roper,   which  can  extrude  a  replacement  tendril  on  its  next   turn.  A  tendril  can  also  be  broken  if  a  creature  takes  an   action  and  succeeds  on  a  DC  15  Strength  check  against   it.  
Spider  Climb.  The  roper  can  climb  difficult  surfaces,   including  upside  down  on  ceilings,  without  needing  to   make  an  ability  check.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

342+}  

Actions  
Multiattack.  The  roper  makes  four  attacks  with  its   tendrils,  uses  Reel,  and  makes  one  attack  with  its  bite.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  22  (4d8  +  4)  piercing  damage.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

345-]  
Tendril.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  50  ft.,   one  creature.  Hit:  The  target  is  grappled  (escape  DC  15).   Until  the  grapple  ends,  the  target  is  restrained  and  has   disadvantage  on  Strength  checks  and  Strength  saving   throws,  and  the  roper  can't  use  the  same  tendril  on   another  target.  
Reel.  The  roper  pulls  each  creature  grappled  by  it  up  to   25  feet  straight  toward  it.  
  
Rust  Monster  
Medium  monstrosity,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  14  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  27  (5d8  +  5)  
Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   13  (+1)   12  (+1)   13  (+1)   2  (-4)   13  (+1)   6  (-2)  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  11  
Languages  --  
Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)  
    
Iron  Scent.  The  rust  monster  can  pinpoint,  by  scent,   the  location  of  ferrous  metal  within  30  feet  of  it.  
Rust  Metal.  Any  nonmagical  weapon  made  of  metal   that  hits  the  rust  monster  corrodes.  After  dealing   damage,  the  weapon  takes  a  permanent  and   cumulative  -1  penalty  to  damage  rolls.  If  its  penalty   drops  to  -5,  the  weapon  is  destroyed.  Nonmagical   ammunition  made  of  metal  that  hits  the  rust  monster   is  destroyed  after  dealing  damage.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  5  (1d8  +  1)  piercing  damage.  
Antennae.  The  rust  monster  corrodes  a  nonmagical   ferrous  metal  object  it  can  see  within  5  feet  of  it.  If  the   object  isn't  being  worn  or  carried,  the  touch  destroys  a   1-foot  cube  of  it.  If  the  object  is  being  worn  or  carried   by  a  creature,  the  creature  can  make  a  DC  11  Dexterity   saving  throw  to  avoid  the  rust  monster's  touch.      If  the  object  touched  is  either  metal  armor  or  a  

metal  shield  being  worn  or  carried,  its  takes  a   permanent  and  cumulative  -1  penalty  to  the  AC  it   offers.  Armor  reduced  to  an  AC  of  10  or  a  shield  that   drops  to  a  +0  bonus  is  destroyed.  If  the  object  touched   is  a  held  metal  weapon,  it  rusts  as  described  in  the  Rust   Metal  trait.     
Monsters (S)
  
Sahuagin  
Medium  humanoid  (sahuagin),  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  12  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  22  (4d8  +  4)   Speed  30  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      13  (+1)   11  (+0)   12  (+1)   12  (+1)   13  (+1)   9  (-1)  
Skills  Perception  +5   Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  15   Languages  Sahuagin   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)        Blood  Frenzy.  The  sahuagin  has  advantage  on  melee   attack  rolls  against  any  creature  that  doesn't  have  all   its  hit  points.   Limited  Amphibiousness.  The  sahuagin  can  breathe  air   and  water,  but  it  needs  to  be  submerged  at  least  once   every  4  hours  to  avoid  suffocating.   Shark  Telepathy.  The  sahuagin  can  magically  command   any  shark  within  120  feet  of  it,  using  a  limited   telepathy.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  sahuagin  makes  two  melee  attacks:   one  with  its  bite  and  one  with  its  claws  or  spear.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  3  (1d4  +  1)  piercing  damage.   Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  3  (1d4  +  1)  slashing  damage.   Spear.  Melee  or  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,   reach  5  ft.  or  range  20/60  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  4  (1d6  +   1)  piercing  damage,  or  5  (1d8  +  1)  piercing  damage  if   used  with  two  hands  to  make  a  melee  attack.     

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

343+}  

Salamander  
Large  elemental,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  15  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  90  (12d10  +  24)   Speed  30  ft.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

346-]  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   14  (+2)   15  (+2)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)   12  (+1)  
Damage  Vulnerabilities  cold   Damage  Resistances  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and  
slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks   Damage  Immunities  fire   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  Ignan   Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)        Heated  Body.  A  creature  that  touches  the  salamander   or  hits  it  with  a  melee  attack  while  within  5  feet  of  it   takes  7  (2d6)  fire  damage.   Heated  Weapons.  Any  metal  melee  weapon  the   salamander  wields  deals  an  extra  3  (1d6)  fire  damage   on  a  hit  (included  in  the  attack).  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  salamander  makes  two  attacks:  one   with  its  spear  and  one  with  its  tail.   Spear.  Melee  or  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,   reach  5  ft.  or  range  20  ft./60  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  11   (2d6  +  4)  piercing  damage,  or  13  (2d8  +  4)  piercing   damage  if  used  with  two  hands  to  make  a  melee  attack,   plus  3  (1d6)  fire  damage.   Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage  plus  7   (2d6)  fire  damage,  and  the  target  is  grappled  (escape   DC  14).  Until  this  grapple  ends,  the  target  is  restrained,   the  salamander  can  automatically  hit  the  target  with  its   tail,  and  the  salamander  can't  make  tail  attacks  against   other  targets.     
Satyr  
Medium  fey,  chaotic  neutral  
Armor  Class  14  (leather  armor)   Hit  Points  31  (7d8)   Speed  40  ft.  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      12  (+1)   16  (+3)   11  (+0)   12  (+1)   10  (+0)   14  (+2)  
Skills  Perception  +2,  Performance  +6,  Stealth  +5   Senses  passive  Perception  12   Languages  Common,  Elvish,  Sylvan   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)        Magic  Resistance.  The  satyr  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Actions  
Ram.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  6  (2d4  +  1)  bludgeoning  damage.   Shortsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  6  (1d6  +  3)  piercing  damage.   Shortbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  range   80/320  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  6  (1d6  +  3)  piercing  damage.     
Shadow  
Medium  undead,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  16  (3d8  +  3)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      6  (-2)   14  (+2)   13  (+1)   6  (-2)   10  (+0)   8  (-1)  
Skills  Stealth  +4  (+6  in  dim  light  or  darkness)   Damage  Vulnerabilities  radiant   Damage  Resistances  acid,  cold,  fire,  lightning,  thunder;  
bludgeoning,  piercing,  and  slashing  from  nonmagical   attacks   Damage  Immunities  necrotic,  poison   Condition  Immunities  exhaustion,  frightened,  grappled,   paralyzed,  petrified,  poisoned,  prone,  restrained   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)        Amorphous.  The  shadow  can  move  through  a  space  as   narrow  as  1  inch  wide  without  squeezing.   Shadow  Stealth.  While  in  dim  light  or  darkness,  the   shadow  can  take  the  Hide  action  as  a  bonus  action.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

344+}  

Sunlight  Weakness.  While  in  sunlight,  the  shadow  has   disadvantage  on  attack  rolls,  ability  checks,  and  saving   throws.  
Actions  
Strength  Drain.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach   5  ft.,  one  creature.  Hit:  9  (2d6  +  2)  necrotic  damage,   and  the  target's  Strength  score  is  reduced  by  1d4.  The  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

347-]   target  dies  if  this  reduces  its  Strength  to  0.  Otherwise,   the  reduction  lasts  until  the  target  finishes  a  short  or   long  rest.      If  a  non-evil  humanoid  dies  from  this  attack,  a  new   shadow  rises  from  the  corpse  1d4  hours  later.     
Shambling  Mound  
Large  plant,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  15  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  136  (16d10  +  48)   Speed  20  ft.,  swim  20  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   8  (-1)   16  (+3)   5  (-3)   10  (+0)   5  (-3)  
Skills  Stealth  +2   Damage  Resistances  cold,  fire   Damage  Immunities  lightning   Condition  Immunities  blinded,  deafened,  exhaustion   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.  (blind  beyond  this  radius),  
passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)        Lightning  Absorption.  Whenever  the  shambling  mound   is  subjected  to  lightning  damage,  it  takes  no  damage   and  regains  a  number  of  hit  points  equal  to  the   lightning  damage  dealt.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  shambling  mound  makes  two  slam   attacks.  If  both  attacks  hit  a  Medium  or  smaller  target,   the  target  is  grappled  (escape  DC  14),  and  the   shambling  mound  uses  its  Engulf  on  it.   Slam.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  13  (2d8  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.   Engulf.  The  shambling  mound  engulfs  a  Medium  or   smaller  creature  grappled  by  it.  The  engulfed  target  is   blinded,  restrained,  and  unable  to  breathe,  and  it  must  

succeed  on  a  DC  14  Constitution  saving  throw  at  the   start  of  each  of  the  mound's  turns  or  take  13  (2d8  +  4)   bludgeoning  damage.  If  the  mound  moves,  the   engulfed  target  moves  with  it.  The  mound  can  have   only  one  creature  engulfed  at  a  time.  
  
Shield  Guardian  
Large  construct,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  142  (15d10  +  60)  
Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   18  (+4)   8  (-1)   18  (+4)   7  (-2)   10  (+0)   3  (-4)  
Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive   Perception  10  
Damage  Immunities  poison  
Condition  Immunities  charmed,  exhaustion,  frightened,   paralyzed,  poisoned  
Languages  understands  commands  given  in  any   language  but  can't  speak  
Challenge  7  (2,900  XP)  
    
Bound.  The  shield  guardian  is  magically  bound  to  an   amulet.  As  long  as  the  guardian  and  its  amulet  are  on   the  same  plane  of  existence,  the  amulet's  wearer  can   telepathically  call  the  guardian  to  travel  to  it,  and  the   guardian  knows  the  distance  and  direction  to  the   amulet.  If  the  guardian  is  within  60  feet  of  the  amulet's   wearer,  half  of  any  damage  the  wearer  takes  (rounded   up)  is  transferred  to  the  guardian.  
Regeneration.  The  shield  guardian  regains  10  hit  points   at  the  start  of  its  turn  if  it  has  at  least  1  hit  point.  
Spell  Storing.  A  spellcaster  who  wears  the  shield   guardian's  amulet  can  cause  the  guardian  to  store  one   spell  of  4th  level  or  lower.  To  do  so,  the  wearer  must   cast  the  spell  on  the  guardian.  The  spell  has  no  effect   but  is  stored  within  the  guardian.  When  commanded   to  do  so  by  the  wearer  or  when  a  situation  arises  that   was  predefined  by  the  spellcaster,  the  guardian  casts   the  stored  spell  with  any  parameters  set  by  the  original   caster,  requiring  no  components.  When  the  spell  is  cast   or  a  new  spell  is  stored,  any  previously  stored  spell  is   lost.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  guardian  makes  two  fist  attacks.  

{+Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

345+}  

Fist.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.  

[-Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.0  

348-]  
Reactions   Shield.  When  a  creature  makes  an  attack  against  the   wearer  of  the  guardian's  amulet,  the  guardian  grants  a   +2  bonus  to  the  wearer's  AC  if  the  guardian  is  within  5   feet  of  the  wearer.     
Skeletons
Skeleton  
Medium  undead,  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  13  (armor  scraps)   Hit  Points  13  (2d8  +  4)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      10  (+0)   14  (+2)   15  (+2)   6  (-2)   8  (-1)   5  (-3)  
Damage  Vulnerabilities  bludgeoning   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  exhaustion,  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  9   Languages  understands  all  languages  it  knew  in  life  but  
can't  speak   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)  
Actions   Shortsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing  damage.   Shortbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  range   80/320  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing  damage.     
Minotaur  Skeleton  
Large  undead,  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  12  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  67  (9d10  +  18)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   11  (+0)   15  (+2)   6  (-2)   8  (-1)   5  (-3)  
Damage  Vulnerabilities  bludgeoning   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  exhaustion,  poisoned  

Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  9   Languages  understands  Abyssal  but  can't  speak   Challenge  2  (450  XP)      Charge.  If  the  skeleton  moves  at  least  10  feet  straight   toward  a  target  and  then  hits  it  with  a  gore  attack  on   the  same  turn,  the  target  takes  an  extra  9  (2d8)   piercing  damage.  If  the  target  is  a  creature,  it  must   succeed  on  a  DC  14  Strength  saving  throw  or  be   pushed  up  to  10  feet  away  and  knocked  prone.  
Actions  
Greataxe.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  17  (2d12  +  4)  slashing  damage.   Gore.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  13  (2d8  +  4)  piercing  damage.     
Warhorse  Skeleton  
Large  undead,  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  13  (barding  scraps)   Hit  Points  22  (3d10  +  6)   Speed  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   12  (+1)   15  (+2)   2  (-4)   8  (-1)   5  (-3)  
Damage  Vulnerabilities  bludgeoning   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  exhaustion,  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  9   Languages  --   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)  
Actions  
Hooves.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Specter  
Medium  undead,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  22  (5d8)   Speed  0  ft.,  fly  50  ft.  (hover)  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      1  (-5)   14  (+2)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)   10  (+0)   11  (+0)  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

349-]  {+5.1  

346+}  

Damage  Resistances  acid,  cold,  fire,  lightning,  thunder;   bludgeoning,  piercing,  and  slashing  from  nonmagical   attacks  
Damage  Immunities  necrotic,  poison   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  exhaustion,  grappled,  
paralyzed,  petrified,  poisoned,  prone,  restrained,   unconscious   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  understands  all  languages  it  knew  in  life  but   can't  speak   Challenge  1  (200  XP)        Incorporeal  Movement.  The  specter  can  move  through   other  creatures  and  objects  as  if  they  were  difficult   terrain.  It  takes  5  (1d10)  force  damage  if  it  ends  its  turn   inside  an  object.   Sunlight  Sensitivity.  While  in  sunlight,  the  specter  has   disadvantage  on  attack  rolls,  as  well  as  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  sight.  
Actions  
Life  Drain.  Melee  Spell  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  10  (3d6)  necrotic  damage.  The  target   must  succeed  on  a  DC  10  Constitution  saving  throw  or   its  hit  point  maximum  is  reduced  by  an  amount  equal   to  the  damage  taken.  This  reduction  lasts  until  the   creature  finishes  a  long  rest.  The  target  dies  if  this   effect  reduces  its  hit  point  maximum  to  0.     
Sphinxes
Androsphinx  
Large  monstrosity,  lawful  neutral  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  199  (19d10  +  95)   Speed  40  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      22  (+6)   10  (+0)   20  (+5)   16  (+3)   18  (+4)   23  (+6)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +6,  Con  +11,  Int  +9,  Wis  +10   Skills  Arcana  +9,  Perception  +10,  Religion  +15   Damage  Immunities  psychic;  bludgeoning,  piercing,  
and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  frightened   Senses  truesight  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  20  

Languages  Common,  Sphinx  
Challenge  17  (18,000  XP)  
    
Inscrutable.  The  sphinx  is  immune  to  any  effect  that   would  sense  its  emotions  or  read  its  thoughts,  as  well   as  any  divination  spell  that  it  refuses.  Wisdom  (Insight)   checks  made  to  ascertain  the  sphinx's  intentions  or   sincerity  have  disadvantage.  
Magic  Weapons.  The  sphinx's  weapon  attacks  are   magical.  
Spellcasting.  The  sphinx  is  a  12th-level  spellcaster.  Its   spellcasting  ability  is  Wisdom  (spell  save  DC  18,  +10  to   hit  with  spell  attacks).  It  requires  no  material   components  to  cast  its  spells.  The  sphinx  has  the   following  cleric  spells  prepared:  
Cantrips  (at  will):  sacred  flame,  spare  the  dying,   thaumaturgy  
1st  level  (4  slots):  command,  detect  evil  and  good,   detect  magic  
2nd  level  (3  slots):  lesser  restoration,  zone  of  truth  
3rd  level  (3  slots):  dispel  magic,  tongues  
4th  level  (3  slots):  banishment,  freedom  of  movement  
5th  level  (2  slots):  flame  strike,  greater  restoration  
6th  level  (1  slot):  heroes'  feast  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  sphinx  makes  two  claw  attacks.  
Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +12  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  17  (2d10  +  6)  slashing  damage.  
Roar  (3/Day).  The  sphinx  emits  a  magical  roar.  Each   time  it  roars  before  finishing  a  long  rest,  the  roar  is   louder  and  the  effect  is  different,  as  detailed  below.   Each  creature  within  500  feet  of  the  sphinx  and  able  to   hear  the  roar  must  make  a  saving  throw.  
First  Roar.  Each  creature  that  fails  a  DC  18  Wisdom   saving  throw  is  frightened  for  1  minute.  A  frightened   creature  can  repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of   each  of  its  turns,  ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a   success.  
Second  Roar.  Each  creature  that  fails  a  DC  18  Wisdom   saving  throw  is  deafened  and  frightened  for  1   minute.  A  frightened  creature  is  paralyzed  and  can   repeat  the  saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its   turns,  ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

350-]  {+5.1  

347+}  

Third  Roar.  Each  creature  makes  a  DC  18  Constitution   saving  throw.  On  a  failed  save,  a  creature  takes  44   (8d10)  thunder  damage  and  is  knocked  prone.  On  a   successful  save,  the  creature  takes  half  as  much   damage  and  isn't  knocked  prone.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  sphinx  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing  from   the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action  option   can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of  another   creature's  turn.  The  sphinx  regains  spent  legendary   actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Claw  Attack.  The  sphinx  makes  one  claw  attack.   Teleport  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  sphinx  magically  
teleports,  along  with  any  equipment  it  is  wearing  or   carrying,  up  to  120  feet  to  an  unoccupied  space  it   can  see.  
Cast  a  Spell  (Costs  3  Actions).  The  sphinx  casts  a  spell   from  its  list  of  prepared  spells,  using  a  spell  slot  as   normal.  
  
Gynosphinx  
Large  monstrosity,  lawful  neutral  
Armor  Class  17  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  136  (16d10  +  48)   Speed  40  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   15  (+2)   16  (+3)   18  (+4)   18  (+4)   18  (+4)  
Skills  Arcana  +12,  History  +12,  Perception  +8,  Religion   +8  
Damage  Resistances  bludgeoning,  piercing,  and   slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  
Damage  Immunities  psychic   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  frightened   Senses  truesight  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  18  
Languages  Common,  Sphinx   Challenge  11  (7,200  XP)       
Inscrutable.  The  sphinx  is  immune  to  any  effect  that   would  sense  its  emotions  or  read  its  thoughts,  as  well   as  any  divination  spell  that  it  refuses.  Wisdom  (Insight)   checks  made  to  ascertain  the  sphinx's  intentions  or   sincerity  have  disadvantage.  
Magic  Weapons.  The  sphinx's  weapon  attacks  are   magical.  

Spellcasting.  The  sphinx  is  a  9th-level  spellcaster.  Its   spellcasting  ability  is  Intelligence  (spell  save  DC  16,  +8   to  hit  with  spell  attacks).  It  requires  no  material   components  to  cast  its  spells.  The  sphinx  has  the   following  wizard  spells  prepared:   Cantrips  (at  will):  mage  hand,  minor  illusion,  
prestidigitation   1st  level  (4  slots):  detect  magic,  identify,  shield   2nd  level  (3  slots):  darkness,  locate  object,  suggestion   3rd  level  (3  slots):  dispel  magic,  remove  curse,  tongues   4th  level  (3  slots):  banishment,  greater  invisibility   5th  level  (1  slot):  legend  lore  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  sphinx  makes  two  claw  attacks.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  13  (2d8  +  4)  slashing  damage.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  sphinx  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing  from   the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action  option   can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of  another   creature's  turn.  The  sphinx  regains  spent  legendary   actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.   Claw  Attack.  The  sphinx  makes  one  claw  attack.   Teleport  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  sphinx  magically  
teleports,  along  with  any  equipment  it  is  wearing  or   carrying,  up  to  120  feet  to  an  unoccupied  space  it   can  see.   Cast  a  Spell  (Costs  3  Actions).  The  sphinx  casts  a  spell   from  its  list  of  prepared  spells,  using  a  spell  slot  as   normal.     
Sprite  
Tiny  fey,  neutral  good  
Armor  Class  15  (leather  armor)   Hit  Points  2  (1d4)   Speed  10  ft.,  fly  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      3  (-4)   18  (+4)   10  (+0)   14  (+2)   13  (+1)   11  (+0)  
Skills  Perception  +3,  Stealth  +8   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  Common,  Elvish,  Sylvan   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

351-]  {+5.1  

348+}  

Actions  
Longsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  1  slashing  damage.  
Shortbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  range   40/160  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  1  piercing  damage,  and  the   target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  10  Constitution  saving   throw  or  become  poisoned  for  1  minute.  If  its  saving   throw  result  is  5  or  lower,  the  poisoned  target  falls   unconscious  for  the  same  duration,  or  until  it  takes   damage  or  another  creature  takes  an  action  to  shake  it   awake.  
Heart  Sight.  The  sprite  touches  a  creature  and   magically  knows  the  creature's  current  emotional  state.   If  the  target  fails  a  DC  10  Charisma  saving  throw,  the   sprite  also  knows  the  creature's  alignment.  Celestials,   fiends,  and  undead  automatically  fail  the  saving  throw.  
Invisibility.  The  sprite  magically  turns  invisible  until  it   attacks  or  casts  a  spell,  or  until  its  concentration  ends   (as  if  concentrating  on  a  spell).  Any  equipment  the   sprite  wears  or  carries  is  invisible  with  it.  
  
Stirge  
Tiny  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  14  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  2  (1d4)  
Speed  10  ft.,  fly  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   4  (-3)   16  (+3)   11  (+0)   2  (-4)   8  (-1)   6  (-2)  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  9  
Languages  --  
Challenge  1/8  (25  XP)  
Actions  
Blood  Drain.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  creature.  Hit:  5  (1d4  +  3)  piercing  damage,  and   the  stirge  attaches  to  the  target.  While  attached,  the   stirge  doesn't  attack.  Instead,  at  the  start  of  each  of   the  stirge's  turns,  the  target  loses  5  (1d4  +  3)  hit  points   due  to  blood  loss.      The  stirge  can  detach  itself  by  spending  5  feet  of  its   movement.  It  does  so  after  it  drains  10  hit  points  of   blood  from  the  target  or  the  target  dies.  A  creature,   including  the  target,  can  use  its  action  to  detach  the   stirge.  
  

Succubus/Incubus  
Medium  fiend  (shapechanger),  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  15  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  66  (12d8  +  12)  
Speed  30  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   8  (-1)   17  (+3)   13  (+1)   15  (+2)   12  (+1)   20  (+5)  
Skills  Deception  +9,  Insight  +5,  Perception  +5,   Persuasion  +9,  Stealth  +7  
Damage  Resistances  cold,  fire,  lightning,  poison;   bludgeoning,  piercing,  and  slashing  from  nonmagical   attacks  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  15  
Languages  Abyssal,  Common,  Infernal,  telepathy  60  ft.  
Challenge  4  (1,100  XP)  
    
Telepathic  Bond.  The  fiend  ignores  the  range   restriction  on  its  telepathy  when  communicating  with  a   creature  it  has  charmed.  The  two  don't  even  need  to   be  on  the  same  plane  of  existence.  
Shapechanger.  The  fiend  can  use  its  action  to   polymorph  into  a  Small  or  Medium  humanoid,  or  back   into  its  true  form.  Without  wings,  the  fiend  loses  its   flying  speed.  Other  than  its  size  and  speed,  its  statistics   are  the  same  in  each  form.  Any  equipment  it  is  wearing   or  carrying  isn't  transformed.  It  reverts  to  its  true  form   if  it  dies.  
Actions  
Claw  (Fiend  Form  Only).  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to   hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  6  (1d6  +  3)  slashing   damage.  
Charm.  One  humanoid  the  fiend  can  see  within  30  feet   of  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  15  Wisdom  saving  throw  or   be  magically  charmed  for  1  day.  The  charmed  target   obeys  the  fiend's  verbal  or  telepathic  commands.  If  the   target  suffers  any  harm  or  receives  a  suicidal  command,   it  can  repeat  the  saving  throw,  ending  the  effect  on  a   success.  If  the  target  successfully  saves  against  the   effect,  or  if  the  effect  on  it  ends,  the  target  is  immune   to  this  fiend's  Charm  for  the  next  24  hours.      The  fiend  can  have  only  one  target  charmed  at  a   time.  If  it  charms  another,  the  effect  on  the  previous   target  ends.  
Draining  Kiss.  The  fiend  kisses  a  creature  charmed  by  it   or  a  willing  creature.  The  target  must  make  a  DC  15  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

352-]  {+5.1  

349+}  

Constitution  saving  throw  against  this  magic,  taking  32   (5d10  +  5)  psychic  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as   much  damage  on  a  successful  one.  The  target's  hit   point  maximum  is  reduced  by  an  amount  equal  to  the   damage  taken.  This  reduction  lasts  until  the  target   finishes  a  long  rest.  The  target  dies  if  this  effect   reduces  its  hit  point  maximum  to  0.  
Etherealness.  The  fiend  magically  enters  the  Ethereal   Plane  from  the  Material  Plane,  or  vice  versa.  
  
Monsters (T)
  
Tarrasque  
Gargantuan  monstrosity  (titan),  unaligned  
Armor  Class  25  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  676  (33d20  +  330)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   30  (+10)   11  (+0)   30  (+10)   3  (-4)   11  (+0)   11  (+0)  
Saving  Throws  Int  +5,  Wis  +9,  Cha  +9   Damage  Immunities  fire,  poison;  bludgeoning,  piercing,  
and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  frightened,  paralyzed,  
poisoned  
Senses  blindsight  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  30  (155,000  XP)  
     Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  tarrasque  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  
Magic  Resistance.  The  tarrasque  has  advantage  on   saving  throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Reflective  Carapace.  Any  time  the  tarrasque  is   targeted  by  a  magic  missile  spell,  a  line  spell,  or  a  spell   that  requires  a  ranged  attack  roll,  roll  a  d6.  On  a  1  to  5,   the  tarrasque  is  unaffected.  On  a  6,  the  tarrasque  is   unaffected,  and  the  effect  is  reflected  back  at  the   caster  as  though  it  originated  from  the  tarrasque,   turning  the  caster  into  the  target.  
Siege  Monster.  The  tarrasque  deals  double  damage  to   objects  and  structures.  

Actions  
Multiattack.  The  tarrasque  can  use  its  Frightful   Presence.  It  then  makes  five  attacks:  one  with  its  bite,   two  with  its  claws,  one  with  its  horns,  and  one  with  its   tail.  It  can  use  its  Swallow  instead  of  its  bite.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +19  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  36  (4d12  +  10)  piercing  damage.  If  the   target  is  a  creature,  it  is  grappled  (escape  DC  20).  Until   this  grapple  ends,  the  target  is  restrained,  and  the   tarrasque  can't  bite  another  target.  
Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +19  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  28  (4d8  +  10)  slashing  damage.  
Horns.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +19  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  32  (4d10  +  10)  piercing  damage.  
Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +19  to  hit,  reach  20  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  24  (4d6  +  10)  bludgeoning  damage.  If  the   target  is  a  creature,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  20   Strength  saving  throw  or  be  knocked  prone.  
Frightful  Presence.  Each  creature  of  the  tarrasque's   choice  within  120  feet  of  it  and  aware  of  it  must   succeed  on  a  DC  17  Wisdom  saving  throw  or  become   frightened  for  1  minute.  A  creature  can  repeat  the   saving  throw  at  the  end  of  each  of  its  turns,  with   disadvantage  if  the  tarrasque  is  within  line  of  sight,   ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.  If  a  creature's   saving  throw  is  successful  or  the  effect  ends  for  it,  the   creature  is  immune  to  the  tarrasque's  Frightful   Presence  for  the  next  24  hours.  
Swallow.  The  tarrasque  makes  one  bite  attack  against   a  Large  or  smaller  creature  it  is  grappling.  If  the  attack   hits,  the  target  takes  the  bite's  damage,  the  target  is   swallowed,  and  the  grapple  ends.  While  swallowed,  the   creature  is  blinded  and  restrained,  it  has  total  cover   against  attacks  and  other  effects  outside  the  tarrasque,   and  it  takes  56  (16d6)  acid  damage  at  the  start  of  each   of  the  tarrasque's  turns.      If  the  tarrasque  takes  60  damage  or  more  on  a  single   turn  from  a  creature  inside  it,  the  tarrasque  must   succeed  on  a  DC  20  Constitution  saving  throw  at  the   end  of  that  turn  or  regurgitate  all  swallowed  creatures,   which  fall  prone  in  a  space  within  10  feet  of  the   tarrasque.  If  the  tarrasque  dies,  a  swallowed  creature   is  no  longer  restrained  by  it  and  can  escape  from  the   corpse  by  using  30  feet  of  movement,  exiting  prone.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  tarrasque  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

353-]  {+5.1  

350+}  

another  creature's  turn.  The  tarrasque  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.   Attack.  The  tarrasque  makes  one  claw  attack  or  tail  
attack.   Move.  The  tarrasque  moves  up  to  half  its  speed.   Chomp  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  tarrasque  makes  one  
bite  attack  or  uses  its  Swallow.     
Treant  
Huge  plant,  chaotic  good  
Armor  Class  16  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  138  (12d12  +  60)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      23  (+6)   8  (-1)   21  (+5)   12  (+1)   16  (+3)   12  (+1)  
Damage  Resistances  bludgeoning,  piercing   Damage  Vulnerabilities  fire   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  Common,  Druidic,  Elvish,  Sylvan   Challenge  9  (5,000  XP)        False  Appearance.  While  the  treant  remains   motionless,  it  is  indistinguishable  from  a  normal  tree.   Siege  Monster.  The  treant  deals  double  damage  to   objects  and  structures.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  treant  makes  two  slam  attacks.   Slam.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  16  (3d6  +  6)  bludgeoning  damage.   Rock.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  range  60/180   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  28  (4d10  +  6)  bludgeoning  damage.   Animate  Trees  (1/Day).  The  treant  magically  animates   one  or  two  trees  it  can  see  within  60  feet  of  it.  These   trees  have  the  same  statistics  as  a  treant,  except  they   have  Intelligence  and  Charisma  scores  of  1,  they  can't   speak,  and  they  have  only  the  Slam  action  option.  An   animated  tree  acts  as  an  ally  of  the  treant.  The  tree   remains  animate  for  1  day  or  until  it  dies;  until  the   treant  dies  or  is  more  than  120  feet  from  the  tree;  or   until  the  treant  takes  a  bonus  action  to  turn  it  back  into   an  inanimate  tree.  The  tree  then  takes  root  if  possible.     

Troll  
Large  giant,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  15  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  84  (8d10  +  40)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   13  (+1)   20  (+5)   7  (-2)   9  (-1)   7  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +2   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  12   Languages  Giant   Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)        Keen  Smell.  The  troll  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  smell.   Regeneration.  The  troll  regains  10  hit  points  at  the   start  of  its  turn.  If  the  troll  takes  acid  or  fire  damage,   this  trait  doesn't  function  at  the  start  of  the  troll's  next   turn.  The  troll  dies  only  if  it  starts  its  turn  with  0  hit   points  and  doesn't  regenerate.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  troll  makes  three  attacks:  one  with  its   bite  and  two  with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (1d6  +  4)  piercing  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  slashing  damage.     
Monsters (U)
  
Unicorn  
Large  celestial, lawful  good  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  67  (9d10  +  18)   Speed  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   14  (+2)   15  (+2)   11  (+0)   17  (+3)   16  (+3)  
Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  paralyzed,  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  13  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

354-]  {+5.1  

351+}  

Languages  Celestial,  Elvish,  Sylvan,  telepathy  60  ft.  
Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)  
    
Charge.  If  the  unicorn  moves  at  least  20  feet  straight   toward  a  target  and  then  hits  it  with  a  horn  attack  on   the  same  turn,  the  target  takes  an  extra  9  (2d8)   piercing  damage.  If  the  target  is  a  creature,  it  must   succeed  on  a  DC  15  Strength  saving  throw  or  be   knocked  prone.  
Innate  Spellcasting.  The  unicorn's  innate  spellcasting   ability  is  Charisma  (spell  save  DC  14).  The  unicorn  can   innately  cast  the  following  spells,  requiring  no   components:  
At  will:  detect  evil  and  good,  druidcraft,  pass  without   trace  
1/day  each:  calm  emotions,  dispel  evil  and  good,   entangle  
Magic  Resistance.  The  unicorn  has  advantage  on   saving  throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.  
Magic  Weapons.  The  unicorn's  weapon  attacks  are   magical.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  unicorn  makes  two  attacks:  one  with   its  hooves  and  one  with  its  horn.  
Hooves.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.  
Horn.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  8  (1d8  +  4)  piercing  damage.  
Healing  Touch  (3/Day).  The  unicorn  touches  another   creature  with  its  horn.  The  target  magically  regains  11   (2d8  +  2)  hit  points.  In  addition,  the  touch  removes  all   diseases  and  neutralizes  all  poisons  afflicting  the  target.  
Teleport  (1/Day).  The  unicorn  magically  teleports  itself   and  up  to  three  willing  creatures  it  can  see  within  5   feet  of  it,  along  with  any  equipment  they  are  wearing   or  carrying,  to  a  location  the  unicorn  is  familiar  with,  up   to  1  mile  away.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  unicorn  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  unicorn  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Hooves.  The  unicorn  makes  one  attack  with  its  hooves.  

Shimmering  Shield  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  unicorn   creates  a  shimmering,  magical  field  around  itself  or   another  creature  it  can  see  within  60  feet  of  it.  The   target  gains  a  +2  bonus  to  AC  until  the  end  of  the   unicorn's  next  turn.  
Heal  Self  (Costs  3  Actions).  The  unicorn  magically   regains  11  (2d8  +  2)  hit  points.  
  
Monsters (V)
  
Vampires
Vampire  
Medium  undead  (shapechanger),  lawful  evil  
Armor  Class  16  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  144  (17d8  +  68)  
Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   18  (+4)   18  (+4)   18  (+4)   17  (+3)   15  (+2)   18  (+4)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +9,  Wis  +7,  Cha  +9  
Skills  Perception  +7,  Stealth  +9  
Damage  Resistances  necrotic;  bludgeoning,  piercing,   and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  
Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  17  
Languages  the  languages  it  knew  in  life  
Challenge  13  (10,000  XP)  
    
Shapechanger.  If  the  vampire  isn't  in  sunlight  or   running  water,  it  can  use  its  action  to  polymorph  into  a   Tiny  bat  or  a  Medium  cloud  of  mist,  or  back  into  its   true  form.      While  in  bat  form,  the  vampire  can't  speak,  its   walking  speed  is  5  feet,  and  it  has  a  flying  speed  of  30   feet.  Its  statistics,  other  than  its  size  and  speed,  are   unchanged.  Anything  it  is  wearing  transforms  with  it,   but  nothing  it  is  carrying  does.  It  reverts  to  its  true   form  if  it  dies.      While  in  mist  form,  the  vampire  can't  take  any   actions,  speak,  or  manipulate  objects.  It  is  weightless,   has  a  flying  speed  of  20  feet,  can  hover,  and  can  enter   a  hostile  creature's  space  and  stop  there.  In  addition,  if   air  can  pass  through  a  space,  the  mist  can  do  so   without  squeezing,  and  it  can't  pass  through  water.  It   has  advantage  on  Strength,  Dexterity,  and  Constitution  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

355-]  {+5.1  

352+}  

saving  throws,  and  it  is  immune  to  all  nonmagical   damage,  except  the  damage  it  takes  from  sunlight.  
Legendary  Resistance  (3/Day).  If  the  vampire  fails  a   saving  throw,  it  can  choose  to  succeed  instead.  
Misty  Escape.  When  it  drops  to  0  hit  points  outside  its   resting  place,  the  vampire  transforms  into  a  cloud  of   mist  (as  in  the  Shapechanger  trait)  instead  of  falling   unconscious,  provided  that  it  isn't  in  sunlight  or   running  water.  If  it  can't  transform,  it  is  destroyed.      While  it  has  0  hit  points  in  mist  form,  it  can't  revert   to  its  vampire  form,  and  it  must  reach  its  resting  place   within  2  hours  or  be  destroyed.  Once  in  its  resting   place,  it  reverts  to  its  vampire  form.  It  is  then  paralyzed   until  it  regains  at  least  1  hit  point.  After  spending  1   hour  in  its  resting  place  with  0  hit  points,  it  regains  1  hit   point.  
Regeneration.  The  vampire  regains  20  hit  points  at  the   start  of  its  turn  if  it  has  at  least  1  hit  point  and  isn't  in   sunlight  or  running  water.  If  the  vampire  takes  radiant   damage  or  damage  from  holy  water,  this  trait  doesn't   function  at  the  start  of  the  vampire's  next  turn.  
Spider  Climb.  The  vampire  can  climb  difficult  surfaces,   including  upside  down  on  ceilings,  without  needing  to   make  an  ability  check.  
Vampire  Weaknesses.  The  vampire  has  the  following   flaws:      Forbiddance.  The  vampire  can't  enter  a  residence   without  an  invitation  from  one  of  the  occupants.      Harmed  by  Running  Water.  The  vampire  takes  20   acid  damage  if  it  ends  its  turn  in  running  water.      Stake  to  the  Heart.  If  a  piercing  weapon  made  of   wood  is  driven  into  the  vampire's  heart  while  the   vampire  is  incapacitated  in  its  resting  place,  the   vampire  is  paralyzed  until  the  stake  is  removed.      Sunlight  Hypersensitivity.  The  vampire  takes  20   radiant  damage  when  it  starts  its  turn  in  sunlight.   While  in  sunlight,  it  has  disadvantage  on  attack  rolls   and  ability  checks.  
Actions  
Multiattack  (Vampire  Form  Only).  The  vampire  makes   two  attacks,  only  one  of  which  can  be  a  bite  attack.  
Unarmed  Strike  (Vampire  Form  Only).  Melee  Weapon   Attack:  +9  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one  creature.  Hit:  8  (1d8  +   4)  bludgeoning  damage.  Instead  of  dealing  damage,   the  vampire  can  grapple  the  target  (escape  DC  18).  
Bite  (Bat  or  Vampire  Form  Only).  Melee  Weapon   Attack:  +9  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one  willing  creature,  or  a   creature  that  is  grappled  by  the  vampire,  incapacitated,  

or  restrained.  Hit:  7  (1d6  +  4)  piercing  damage  plus  10   (3d6)  necrotic  damage.  The  target's  hit  point  maximum   is  reduced  by  an  amount  equal  to  the  necrotic  damage   taken,  and  the  vampire  regains  hit  points  equal  to  that   amount.  The  reduction  lasts  until  the  target  finishes  a   long  rest.  The  target  dies  if  this  effect  reduces  its  hit   point  maximum  to  0.  A  humanoid  slain  in  this  way  and   then  buried  in  the  ground  rises  the  following  night  as  a   vampire  spawn  under  the  vampire's  control.  
Charm.  The  vampire  targets  one  humanoid  it  can  see   within  30  feet  of  it.  If  the  target  can  see  the  vampire,   the  target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  17  Wisdom  saving   throw  against  this  magic  or  be  charmed  by  the  vampire.   The  charmed  target  regards  the  vampire  as  a  trusted   friend  to  be  heeded  and  protected.  Although  the  target   isn't  under  the  vampire's  control,  it  takes  the  vampire's   requests  or  actions  in  the  most  favorable  way  it  can,   and  it  is  a  willing  target  for  the  vampire's  bite  attack.      Each  time  the  vampire  or  the  vampire's  companions   do  anything  harmful  to  the  target,  it  can  repeat  the   saving  throw,  ending  the  effect  on  itself  on  a  success.   Otherwise,  the  effect  lasts  24  hours  or  until  the   vampire  is  destroyed,  is  on  a  different  plane  of   existence  than  the  target,  or  takes  a  bonus  action  to   end  the  effect.  
Children  of  the  Night  (1/Day).  The  vampire  magically   calls  2d4  swarms  of  bats  or  rats,  provided  that  the  sun   isn't  up.  While  outdoors,  the  vampire  can  call  3d6   wolves  instead.  The  called  creatures  arrive  in  1d4   rounds,  acting  as  allies  of  the  vampire  and  obeying  its   spoken  commands.  The  beasts  remain  for  1  hour,  until   the  vampire  dies,  or  until  the  vampire  dismisses  them   as  a  bonus  action.  
Legendary  Actions  
The  vampire  can  take  3  legendary  actions,  choosing   from  the  options  below.  Only  one  legendary  action   option  can  be  used  at  a  time  and  only  at  the  end  of   another  creature's  turn.  The  vampire  regains  spent   legendary  actions  at  the  start  of  its  turn.  
Move.  The  vampire  moves  up  to  its  speed  without   provoking  opportunity  attacks.  
Unarmed  Strike.  The  vampire  makes  one  unarmed   strike.  
Bite  (Costs  2  Actions).  The  vampire  makes  one  bite   attack.  
  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

356-]  {+5.1  

353+}  

Vampire  Spawn  
Medium  undead,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  15  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  82  (11d8  +  33)  
Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   16  (+3)   16  (+3)   16  (+3)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)   12  (+1)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +6,  Wis  +3  
Skills  Perception  +3,  Stealth  +6  
Damage  Resistances  necrotic;  bludgeoning,  piercing,   and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  13  
Languages  the  languages  it  knew  in  life  
Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)  
    
Regeneration.  The  vampire  regains  10  hit  points  at  the   start  of  its  turn  if  it  has  at  least  1  hit  point  and  isn't  in   sunlight  or  running  water.  If  the  vampire  takes  radiant   damage  or  damage  from  holy  water,  this  trait  doesn't   function  at  the  start  of  the  vampire's  next  turn.  
Spider  Climb.  The  vampire  can  climb  difficult  surfaces,   including  upside  down  on  ceilings,  without  needing  to   make  an  ability  check.  
Vampire  Weaknesses.  The  vampire  has  the  following   flaws:      Forbiddance.  The  vampire  can't  enter  a  residence   without  an  invitation  from  one  of  the  occupants.      Harmed  by  Running  Water.  The  vampire  takes  20   acid  damage  when  it  ends  its  turn  in  running  water.      Stake  to  the  Heart.  The  vampire  is  destroyed  if  a   piercing  weapon  made  of  wood  is  driven  into  its  heart   while  it  is  incapacitated  in  its  resting  place.      Sunlight  Hypersensitivity.  The  vampire  takes  20   radiant  damage  when  it  starts  its  turn  in  sunlight.   While  in  sunlight,  it  has  disadvantage  on  attack  rolls   and  ability  checks.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  vampire  makes  two  attacks,  only  one   of  which  can  be  a  bite  attack.  
Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  8  (2d4  +  3)  slashing  damage.  Instead  of   dealing  damage,  the  vampire  can  grapple  the  target   (escape  DC  13).  

Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   willing  creature,  or  a  creature  that  is  grappled  by  the   vampire,  incapacitated,  or  restrained.  Hit:  6  (1d6  +  3)   piercing  damage  plus  7  (2d6)  necrotic  damage.  The   target's  hit  point  maximum  is  reduced  by  an  amount   equal  to  the  necrotic  damage  taken,  and  the  vampire   regains  hit  points  equal  to  that  amount.  The  reduction   lasts  until  the  target  finishes  a  long  rest.  The  target  dies   if  this  effect  reduces  its  hit  point  maximum  to  0.     
Monsters (W)
  
Wight  
Medium  undead,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  14  (studded  leather)   Hit  Points  45  (6d8  +  18)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   14  (+2)   16  (+3)   10  (+0)   13  (+1)   15  (+2)  
Skills  Perception  +3,  Stealth  +4   Damage  Resistances  necrotic;  bludgeoning,  piercing,  
and  slashing  from  nonmagical  attacks  that  aren't   silvered   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  exhaustion,  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  13   Languages  the  languages  it  knew  in  life   Challenge  3  (700  XP)        Sunlight  Sensitivity.  While  in  sunlight,  the  wight  has   disadvantage  on  attack  rolls,  as  well  as  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  sight.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  wight  makes  two  longsword  attacks   or  two  longbow  attacks.  It  can  use  its  Life  Drain  in  place   of  one  longsword  attack.   Life  Drain.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  creature.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  necrotic  damage.  The   target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  13  Constitution  saving   throw  or  its  hit  point  maximum  is  reduced  by  an   amount  equal  to  the  damage  taken.  This  reduction   lasts  until  the  target  finishes  a  long  rest.  The  target  dies  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

357-]  {+5.1  

354+}  

if  this  effect  reduces  its  hit  point  maximum  to  0.      A  humanoid  slain  by  this  attack  rises  24  hours  later   as  a  zombie  under  the  wight's  control,  unless  the   humanoid  is  restored  to  life  or  its  body  is  destroyed.   The  wight  can  have  no  more  than  twelve  zombies   under  its  control  at  one  time.  
Longsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  6  (1d8  +  2)  slashing  damage,  or  7  (1d10   +  2)  slashing  damage  if  used  with  two  hands.  
Longbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  range   150/600  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  6  (1d8  +  2)  piercing   damage.  
  
Will-o'-Wisp  
Tiny  undead,  chaotic  evil  
Armor  Class  19  
Hit  Points  22  (9d4)  
Speed  0  ft.,  fly  50  ft.  (hover)  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   1  (-5)   28  (+9)   10  (+0)   13  (+1)   14  (+2)   11  (+0)  
Damage  Immunities  lightning,  poison  
Damage  Resistances  acid,  cold,  fire,  necrotic,  thunder;   bludgeoning,  piercing,  and  slashing  from  nonmagical   attacks  
Condition  Immunities  exhaustion,  grappled,  paralyzed,   poisoned,  prone,  restrained,  unconscious  
Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  12  
Languages  the  languages  it  knew  in  life  
Challenge  2  (450  XP)  
    
Consume  Life.  As  a  bonus  action,  the  will-o'-wisp  can   target  one  creature  it  can  see  within  5  feet  of  it  that   has  0  hit  points  and  is  still  alive.  The  target  must   succeed  on  a  DC  10  Constitution  saving  throw  against   this  magic  or  die.  If  the  target  dies,  the  will-o'-wisp   regains  10  (3d6)  hit  points.  
Ephemeral.  The  will-o'-wisp  can't  wear  or  carry   anything.  
Incorporeal  Movement.  The  will-o'-wisp  can  move   through  other  creatures  and  objects  as  if  they  were   difficult  terrain.  It  takes  5  (1d10)  force  damage  if  it   ends  its  turn  inside  an  object.  
Variable  Illumination.  The  will-o'-wisp  sheds  bright   light  in  a  5-  to  20-foot  radius  and  dim  light  for  an  

additional  number  of  feet  equal  to  the  chosen  radius.   The  will-o'-wisp  can  alter  the  radius  as  a  bonus  action.  
Actions  
Shock.  Melee  Spell  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  9  (2d8)  lightning  damage.   Invisibility.  The  will-o'-wisp  and  its  light  magically   become  invisible  until  it  attacks  or  uses  its  Consume   Life,  or  until  its  concentration  ends  (as  if  concentrating   on  a  spell).     
Wraith  
Medium  undead,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  13   Hit  Points  67  (9d8  +  27)   Speed  0  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  (hover)  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      6  (-2)   16  (+3)   16  (+3)   12  (+1)   14  (+2)   15  (+2)  
Damage  Resistances  acid,  cold,  fire,  lightning,  thunder;   bludgeoning,  piercing,  and  slashing  from  nonmagical   attacks  that  aren't  silvered  
Damage  Immunities  necrotic,  poison   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  exhaustion,  grappled,  
paralyzed,  petrified,  poisoned,  prone,  restrained   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  12   Languages  the  languages  it  knew  in  life   Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)        Incorporeal  Movement.  The  wraith  can  move  through   other  creatures  and  objects  as  if  they  were  difficult   terrain.  It  takes  5  (1d10)  force  damage  if  it  ends  its  turn   inside  an  object.   Sunlight  Sensitivity.  While  in  sunlight,  the  wraith  has   disadvantage  on  attack  rolls,  as  well  as  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  sight.  
Actions  
Life  Drain.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  creature.  Hit:  21  (4d8  +  3)  necrotic  damage.  The   target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  14  Constitution  saving   throw  or  its  hit  point  maximum  is  reduced  by  an   amount  equal  to  the  damage  taken.  This  reduction   lasts  until  the  target  finishes  a  long  rest.  The  target  dies   if  this  effect  reduces  its  hit  point  maximum  to  0.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

358-]  {+5.1  

355+}  

Create  Specter.  The  wraith  targets  a  humanoid  within   10  feet  of  it  that  has  been  dead  for  no  longer  than  1   minute  and  died  violently.  The  target's  spirit  rises  as  a   specter  in  the  space  of  its  corpse  or  in  the  nearest   unoccupied  space.  The  specter  is  under  the  wraith's   control.  The  wraith  can  have  no  more  than  seven   specters  under  its  control  at  one  time.     
Wyvern  
Large  dragon,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  110  (13d10  +  39)   Speed  20  ft.,  fly  80  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   10  (+0)   16  (+3)   5  (-3)   12  (+1)   6  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +4   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  14   Languages  --   Challenge  6  (2,300  XP)  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  wyvern  makes  two  attacks:  one  with   its  bite  and  one  with  its  stinger.  While  flying,  it  can  use   its  claws  in  place  of  one  other  attack.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  piercing  damage.   Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  13  (2d8  +  4)  slashing  damage.   Stinger.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  creature.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  piercing  damage.  The   target  must  make  a  DC  15  Constitution  saving  throw,   taking  24  (7d6)  poison  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half   as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.     
Monsters (X)
  
Xorn  
Medium  elemental,  neutral  
Armor  Class  19  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  73  (7d8  +  42)   Speed  20  ft.,  burrow  20  ft.  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      17  (+3)   10  (+0)   22  (+6)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)   11  (+0)  
Skills  Perception  +6,  Stealth  +3   Damage  Resistances  piercing  and  slashing  from  
nonmagical  attacks  that  aren't  adamantine   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  tremorsense  60  ft.,  
passive  Perception  16   Languages  Terran   Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)      Earth  Glide.  The  xorn  can  burrow  through  nonmagical,   unworked  earth  and  stone.  While  doing  so,  the  xorn   doesn't  disturb  the  material  it  moves  through.   Stone  Camouflage.  The  xorn  has  advantage  on   Dexterity  (Stealth)  checks  made  to  hide  in  rocky  terrain.   Treasure  Sense.  The  xorn  can  pinpoint,  by  scent,  the   [-location-]   {+location  of  precious  metals  and  stones,  such  as  coins   and  gems,  within  60  feet  of  it.  
Actions   Multiattack.  The  xorn  makes  three  claw  attacks  and   one  bite  attack.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  6  (1d6  +  3)  slashing  damage.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  13  (3d6  +  3)  piercing  damage.     
Monsters (Z)
  
Zombies
Zombie  
Medium  undead,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  8   Hit  Points  22  (3d8  +  9)   Speed  20  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      13  (+1)   6  (-2)   16  (+3)   3  (-4)   6  (-2)   5  (-3)  
Saving  Throws  Wis  +0   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  8  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

356  

Languages  understands  the  languages  it  knew  in  life   but  can't  speak  
Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)      Undead  Fortitude.  If  damage  reduces  the  zombie  to  0   hit  points,  it  must  make  a  Constitution  saving  throw   with  a  DC  of  5  +  the  damage  taken,  unless  the  damage   is  radiant  or  from  a  critical  hit.  On  a  success,  the   zombie  drops  to  1  hit  point  instead.  
Actions  
Slam.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  4  (1d6  +  1)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Ogre  Zombie  
Large  undead,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  8   Hit  Points  85  (9d10  +  36)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   6  (-2)   18  (+4)   3  (-4)   6  (-2)   5  (-3)  
Saving  Throws  Wis  +0   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  8   Languages  understands  Common  and  Giant  but  can't  
speak   Challenge  2  (450  XP)      Undead  Fortitude.  If  damage  reduces  the  zombie  to  0   hit  points,  it  must  make  a  Constitution  saving  throw   with  a  DC  of  5  +  the  damage  taken,  unless  the  damage   is  radiant  or  from  a  critical  hit.  On  a  success,  the   zombie  drops  to  1  hit  point  instead.  
Actions  
Morningstar.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  13  (2d8  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

357  

Appendix PH-A: Conditions
Conditions  alter  a  creature's  capabilities  in  a  variety   of  ways  and  can  arise  as  a  result  of  a  spell,  a  class   feature,  a  monster s  attack,  or  other  effect.  Most   conditions,  such  as  blinded,  are  impairments,  but  a   few,  such  as  invisible,  can  be  advantageous.      A  condition  lasts  either  until  it  is  countered  (the   prone  condition  is  countered  by  standing  up,  for   example)  or  for  a  duration  specified  by  the  effect   that  imposed  the  condition.      If  multiple  effects  impose  the  same  condition  on  a   creature,  each  instance  of  the  condition  has  its  own   duration,  but  the  condition's  effects  don't  get  worse.   A  creature  either  has  a  condition  or  doesn't.      The  following  definitions  specify  what  happens  to   a  creature  while  it  is  subjected  to  a  condition.  
Blinded
·   A  blinded  creature  can't  see  and  automatically   fails  any  ability  check  that  requires  sight.  
·   Attack  rolls  against  the  creature  have  advantage,   and  the  creature's  attack  rolls  have  disadvantage.  
Charmed
·   A  charmed  creature  can't  attack  the  charmer  or   target  the  charmer  with  harmful  abilities  or   magical  effects.  
·   The  charmer  has  advantage  on  any  ability  check  to   interact  socially  with  the  creature.  
Deafened
·   A  deafened  creature  can't  hear  and  automatically   fails  any  ability  check  that  requires  hearing.  
  
Exhaustion
Some  special  abilities  and  environmental  hazards,  such  as   starvation  and  the  long-term  effects  of  freezing  or  scorching   temperatures,  can  lead  to  a  special  condition  called   exhaustion.  Exhaustion  is  measured  in  six  levels.  An  effect   can  give  a  creature  one  or  more  levels  of  exhaustion,  as   specified  in  the  effect's  description.      Level   Effect      1   Disadvantage  on  ability  checks      2   Speed  halved      3   Disadvantage  on  attack  rolls  and  saving  throws        4   Hit  point  maximum  halved      5   Speed  reduced  to  0  

   6   Death      If  an  already  exhausted  creature  suffers  another  effect  that   causes  exhaustion,  its  current  level  of  exhaustion  increases   by  the  amount  specified  in  the  effect's  description.      A  creature  suffers  the  effect  of  its  current  level  of   exhaustion  as  well  as  all  lower  levels.  For  example,  a  creature   suffering  level  2  exhaustion  has  its  speed  halved  and  has   disadvantage  on  ability  checks.      An  effect  that  removes  exhaustion  reduces  its  level  as   specified  in  the  effect's  description,  with  all  exhaustion   effects  ending  if  a  creature's  exhaustion  level  is  reduced   below  1.      Finishing  a  long  rest  reduces  a  creature's  exhaustion  level   by  1,  provided  that  the  creature  has  also  ingested  some  food   and  drink.  
Frightened
·   A  frightened  creature  has  disadvantage  on  ability   checks  and  attack  rolls  while  the  source  of  its  fear   is  within  line  of  sight.  
·   The  creature  can't  willingly  move  closer  to  the   source  of  its  fear.  
Grappled
·   A  grappled  creature's  speed  becomes  0,  and  it   can't  benefit  from  any  bonus  to  its  speed.  
·   The  condition  ends  if  the  grappler  is  incapacitated   (see  the  condition).  
·   The  condition  also  ends  if  an  effect  removes  the   grappled  creature  from  the  reach  of  the  grappler   or  grappling  effect,  such  as  when  a  creature  is   hurled  away  by  the  thunder-wave  spell.  
Incapacitated
·   An  incapacitated  creature  can't  take  actions  or   reactions.  
Invisible
·   An  invisible  creature  is  impossible  to  see  without   the  aid  of  magic  or  a  special  sense.  For  the  purpose   of  hiding,  the  creature  is  heavily  obscured.  The   creature's  location  can  be  detected  by  any  noise  it   makes  or  any  tracks  it  leaves.  
·   Attack  rolls  against  the  creature  have   disadvantage,  and  the  creature's  attack  rolls  have   advantage.  
Paralyzed
·   A  paralyzed  creature  is  incapacitated  (see  the   condition)  and  can't  move  or  speak.  
·   The  creature  automatically  fails  Strength  and   Dexterity  saving  throws.  
·   Attack  rolls  against  the  creature  have  advantage.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

358  

·   Any  attack  that  hits  the  creature  is  a  critical  hit  if   the  attacker  is  within  5  feet  of  the  creature.  
Petrified
·   A  petrified  creature  is  transformed,  along  with  any   nonmagical  object  it  is  wearing  or  carrying,  into  a   solid  inanimate  substance  (usually  stone).  Its   weight  increases  by  a  factor  of  ten,  and  it  ceases   aging.  
·   The  creature  is  incapacitated  (see  the  condition),   can't  move  or  speak,  and  is  unaware  of  its   surroundings.  
·   Attack  rolls  against  the  creature  have  advantage.   ·   The  creature  automatically  fails  Strength  and  
Dexterity  saving  throws.   ·   The  creature  has  resistance  to  all  damage.   ·   The  creature  is  immune  to  poison  and  disease,  
although  a  poison  or  disease  already  in  its  system   is  suspended,  not  neutralized.  
Poisoned
·   A  poisoned  creature  has  disadvantage  on  attack   rolls  and  ability  checks.  
Prone
·   A  prone  creature's  only  movement  option  is  to   crawl,  unless  it  stands  up  and  thereby  ends  the   condition.  
·   The  creature  has  disadvantage  on  attack  rolls.   ·   An  attack  roll  against  the  creature  has  advantage  if  
the  attacker  is  within  5  feet  of  the  creature.   Otherwise,  the  attack  roll  has  disadvantage.  
Restrained
·   A  restrained  creature's  speed  becomes  0,  and  it   can't  benefit  from  any  bonus  to  its  speed.  
·   Attack  rolls  against  the  creature  have  advantage,   and  the  creature's  attack  rolls  have  disadvantage.  
·   The  creature  has  disadvantage  on  Dexterity  saving   throws.  
Stunned
·   A  stunned  creature  is  incapacitated  (see  the   condition),  can't  move,  and  can  speak  only   falteringly.  
·   The  creature  automatically  fails  Strength  and   Dexterity  saving  throws.  
·   Attack  rolls  against  the  creature  have  advantage.  

Unconscious
·   An  unconscious  creature  is  incapacitated  (see  the   condition),  can't  move  or  speak,  and  is  unaware  of   its  surroundings  
·   The  creature  drops  whatever  it's  holding  and  falls   prone.  
·   The  creature  automatically  fails  Strength  and   Dexterity  saving  throws.  
·   Attack  rolls  against  the  creature  have  advantage.   ·   Any  attack  that  hits  the  creature  is  a  critical  hit  if  
the  attacker  is  within  5  feet  of  the  creature.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

359  

Appendix PH-B: Fantasy-Historical Pantheons
The  Celtic,  Egyptian,  Greek,  and  Norse  pantheons  are  
fantasy  interpretations  of  historical  religions  from   our  world's  ancient  times.  They  include  deities  that  
are  most  appropriate  for  use  in  a  game,  divorced  
from  their  historical  context  in  the  real  world  and  
united  into  pantheons  that  serve  the  needs  of  the  
game.  

The Egyptian Pantheon
These  gods  are  a  young  dynasty  of  an  ancient  divine   family,  heirs  to  the  rulership  of  the  cosmos  and  the   maintenance  of  the  divine  principle  of  Ma'at--the   fundamental  order  of  truth,  justice,  law,  and  order   that  puts  gods,  mortal  pharaohs,  and  ordinary  men   and  women  in  their  logical  and  rightful  place  in  the   universe.      The  Egyptian  pantheon  is  unusual  in  having  three   gods  responsible  for  death,  each  with  different   alignments.  Anubis  is  the  lawful  neutral  god  of  the   afterlife,  who  judges  the  souls  of  the  dead.  Set  is  a   chaotic  evil  god  of  murder,  perhaps  best  known  for   killing  his  brother  Osiris.  And  Nephthys  is  a  chaotic   good  goddess  of  mourning.    

The Celtic Pantheon
It's  said  that  something  wild  lurks  in  the  heart  of   every  soul,  a  space  that  thrills  to  the  sound  of  geese   calling  at  night,  to  the  whispering  wind  through  the   pines,  to  the  unexpected  red  of  mistletoe  on  an   oak--and  it  is  in  this  space  that  the  Celtic  gods  dwell.   They  sprang  from  the  brook  and  stream,  their  might   heightened  by  the  strength  of  the  oak  and  the  beauty   of  the  woodlands  and  open  moor.  When  the  first   forester  dared  put  a  name  to  the  face  seen  in  the   bole  of  a  tree  or  the  voice  babbling  in  a  brook,  these   gods  forced  themselves  into  being.      The  Celtic  gods  are  as  often  served  by  druids  as  by   clerics,  for  they  are  closely  aligned  with  the  forces  of   nature  that  druids  revere.    
The Greek Pantheon
The  gods  of  Olympus  make  themselves  known  with   the  gentle  lap  of  waves  against  the  shores  and  the   crash  of  the  thunder  among  the  cloud-enshrouded   peaks.  The  thick  boar-infested  woods  and  the  sere,   olive-covered  hillsides  hold  evidence  of  their  passing.   Every  aspect  of  nature  echoes  with  their  presence,   and  they've  made  a  place  for  themselves  inside  the   human  heart,  too.     

The Norse Pantheon
Where  the  land  plummets  from  the  snowy  hills  into   the  icy  fjords  below,  where  the  longboats  draw  up   on  to  the  beach,  where  the  glaciers  flow  forward  and   retreat  with  every  fall  and  spring--this  is  the  land  of   the  Vikings,  the  home  of  the  Norse  pantheon.  It's  a   brutal  clime,  and  one  that  calls  for  brutal  living.  The   warriors  of  the  land  have  had  to  adapt  to  the  harsh   conditions  in  order  to  survive,  but  they  haven't  been   too  twisted  by  the  needs  of  their  environment.  Given   the  necessity  of  raiding  for  food  and  wealth,  it's   surprising  the  mortals  turned  out  as  well  as  they  did.   Their  powers  reflect  the  need  these  warriors  had  for   strong  leadership  and  decisive  action.  Thus,  they  see   their  deities  in  every  bend  of  a  river,  hear  them  in   the  crash  of  the  thunder  and  the  booming  of  the   glaciers,  and  smell  them  in  the  smoke  of  a  burning   longhouse.      The  Norse  pantheon  includes  two  main  families,   the  Aesir  (deities  of  war  and  destiny)  and  the  Vanir   (gods  of  fertility  and  prosperity).  Once  enemies,   these  two  families  are  now  closely  allied  against   their  common  enemies,  the  giants  (including  the   gods  Surtur  and  Thrym).  

Celtic  Deities  

Deity   The  Daghdha,  god  of  weather  and  crops   Arawn,  god  of  life  and  death   Belenus,  god  of  sun,  light,  and  warmth   Brigantia,  goddess  of  rivers  and  livestock   Diancecht,  god  of  medicine  and  healing   Dunatis,  god  of  mountains  and  peaks   Goibhniu,  god  of  smiths  and  healing   Lugh,  god  of  arts,  travel,  and  commerce   Manannan  mac  Lir,  god  of  oceans  and  sea  creatures  

Alignment   CG   NE   NG   NG   LG   N   NG   CN   LN  

Suggested  Domains   Nature,  Trickery   Life,  Death   Light   Life   Life   Nature   Knowledge,  Life   Knowledge,  Life   Nature,  Tempest  

Symbol   Bubbling  cauldron  or  shield   Black  star  on  gray  background   Solar  disk  and  standing  stones   Footbridge   Crossed  oak  and  mistletoe  branches   Red  sun-capped  mountain  peak   Giant  mallet  over  sword   Pair  of  long  hands   Wave  of  white  water  on  green  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

360  

Math  Mathonwy,  god  of  magic   Morrigan,  goddess  of  battle   Nuada,  god  of  war  and  warriors   Oghma,  god  of  speech  and  writing   Silvanus,  god  of  nature  and  forests  
  

NE   Knowledge   CE   War   N   War   NG   Knowledge   N   Nature  

Staff   Two  crossed  spears   Silver  hand  on  black  background   Unfurled  scroll   Summer  oak  tree  

Greek  Deities  
Deity   Zeus,  god  of  the  sky,  ruler  of  the  gods   Aphrodite,  goddess  of  love  and  beauty   Apollo,  god  of  light,  music,  and  healing   Ares,  god  of  war  and  strife   Artemis,  goddess  of  hunting  and  childbirth   Athena,  goddess  of  wisdom  and  civilization   Demeter,  goddess  of  agriculture  
Dionysus,  god  of  mirth  and  wine   Hades,  god  of  the  underworld   Hecate,  goddess  of  magic  and  the  moon   Hephaestus,  god  of  smithing  and  craft   Hera,  goddess  of  marriage  and  intrigue   Hercules,  god  of  strength  and  adventure  
Hermes,  god  of  travel  and  commerce   Hestia,  goddess  of  home  and  family   Nike,  goddess  of  victory   Pan,  god  of  nature   Poseidon,  god  of  the  sea  and  earthquakes   Tyche,  goddess  of  good  fortune     

Alignment   N   CG   CG   CE   NG   LG   NG  
CN   LE   CE   NG   CN   CG  
CG   NG   LN   CN   CN   N  

Suggested  Domains   Tempest   Light   Knowledge,  Life,  Light   War   Life,  Nature   Knowledge,  War   Life  
Life   Death   Knowledge,  Trickery   Knowledge   Trickery   Tempest,  War  
Trickery   Life   War   Nature   Tempest   Trickery  

Symbol   Fist  full  of  lightning  bolts   Sea  shell   Lyre   Spear   Bow  and  arrow  on  lunar  disk   Owl  
Mare s  head   Thyrsus  (staff  tipped  with  pine  cone)   Black  ram   Setting  moon   Hammer  and  anvil   Fan  of  peacock  feathers  
Lion s  head   Caduceus  (winged  staff  and  serpents)   Hearth   Winged  woman   Syrinx  (pan  pipes)   Trident   Red  pentagram  

Egyptian  Deities  

Deity   Re-Horakhty,  god  of  the  sun,  ruler  of  the  gods   Anubis,  god  of  judgment  and  death   Apep,  god  of  evil,  fire,  and  serpents   Bast,  goddess  of  cats  and  vengeance   Bes,  god  of  luck  and  music   Hathor,  goddess  of  love,  music,  and  motherhood  
Imhotep,  god  of  crafts  and  medicine   Isis,  goddess  of  fertility  and  magic   Nephthys,  goddess  of  death  and  grief   Osiris,  god  of  nature  and  the  underworld   Ptah,  god  of  crafts,  knowledge,  and  secrets   Set,  god  of  darkness  and  desert  storms   Sobek,  god  of  water  and  crocodiles   Thoth,  god  of  knowledge  and  wisdom     

Alignment   LG   LN   NE   CG   CN   NG  
NG   NG   CG   LG   LN   CE   LE   N  

Suggested  Domains   Life,  Light   Death   Trickery   War   Trickery   Life,  Light  
Knowledge   Knowledge,  Life   Death   Life,  Nature   Knowledge   Death,  Tempest,  Trickery   Nature,  Tempest   Knowledge  

Symbol   Solar  disk  encircled  by  serpent   Black  jackal   Flaming  snake   Cat   Image  of  the  misshapen  deity  
Horned  cow s  head  with  lunar  disk   Step  pyramid   Ankh  and  star   Horns  around  a  lunar  disk   Crook  and  flail   Bull   Coiled  cobra   Crocodile  head  with  horns  and  plumes   Ibis  

Norse  Deities  
Deity   Odin,  god  of  knowledge  and  war   Aegir,  god  of  the  sea  and  storms   Balder,  god  of  beauty  and  poetry   Forseti,  god  of  justice  and  law   Frey,  god  of  fertility  and  the  sun   Freya,  goddess  of  fertility  and  love  

Alignment   NG   NE   NG   N   NG   NG  

Suggested  Domains   Knowledge,  War   Tempest   Life,  Light   Light   Life,  Light   Life  

Symbol   Watching  blue  eye   Rough  ocean  waves   Gem-encrusted  silver  chalice   Head  of  a  bearded  man   Ice-blue  greatsword   Falcon  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

361  

Frigga,  goddess  of  birth  and  fertility  

N   Life,  Light  

Cat  

Heimdall,  god  of  watchfulness  and  loyalty   LG   Light,  War  

Curling  musical  horn  

Hel,  goddess  of  the  underworld  

NE   Death  

Woman s  face,  rotting  on  one  side  

Hermod,  god  of  luck  

CN   Trickery  

Winged  scroll  

Loki,  god  of  thieves  and  trickery  

CE   Trickery  

Flame  

Njord,  god  of  sea  and  wind  

NG   Nature,  Tempest   Gold  coin  

Odur,  god  of  light  and  the  sun  

CG   Light  

Solar  disk  

Sif,  goddess  of  war  

CG   War  

Upraised  sword  

Skadi,  god  of  earth  and  mountains  

N   Nature  

Mountain  peak  

Surtur,  god  of  fire  giants  and  war  

LE   War  

Flaming  sword  

Thor,  god  of  storms  and  thunder  

CG   Tempest,  War  

Hammer  

Thrym,  god  of  frost  giants  and  cold  

CE   War  

White  double-bladed  axe  

Tyr,  god  of  courage  and  strategy  

LN   Knowledge,  War   Sword  

Uller,  god  of  hunting  and  winter  

CN   Nature  

Longbow  

  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

362  

Appendix PH-C: The Planes of Existence
The  cosmos  teems  with  a  multitude  of  worlds  as  well   as  myriad  alternate  dimensions  of  reality,  called  the   planes  of  existence.  It  encompasses  every  world   where  GMs  run  their  adventures,  all  within  the   relatively  mundane  realm  of  the  Material  Plane.   Beyond  that  plane  are  domains  of  raw  elemental   matter  and  energy,  realms  of  pure  thought  and  ethos,   the  homes  of  demons  and  angels,  and  the  dominions   of  the  gods.        Many  spells  and  magic  items  can  draw  energy   from  these  planes,  summon  the  creatures  that  dwell   there,  communicate  with  their  denizens,  and  allow   adventurers  to  travel  there.  As  your  character   achieves  greater  power  and  higher  levels,  you  might   walk  on  streets  made  of  solid  fire  or  test  your  mettle   on  a  battlefield  where  the  fallen  are  resurrected  with   each  dawn.  
The Material Plane
The  Material  Plane  is  the  nexus  where  the   philosophical  and  elemental  forces  that  define  the   other  planes  collide  in  the  jumbled  existence  of   mortal  life  and  mundane  matter.  All  fantasy  gaming   worlds  exist  within  the  Material  Plane,  making  it  the   starting  point  for  most  campaigns  and  adventures.   The  rest  of  the  multiverse  is  defined  in  relation  to   the  Material  Plane.      The  worlds  of  the  Material  Plane  are  infinitely   diverse,  for  they  reflect  the  creative  imagination  of   the  GMs  who  set  their  games  there,  as  well  as  the   players  whose  heroes  adventure  there.  They  include   magic-wasted  desert  planets  and  island-dotted   water  worlds,  worlds  where  magic  combines  with   advanced  technology  and  others  trapped  in  an   endless  Stone  Age,  worlds  where  the  gods  walk  and   places  they  have  abandoned.  
Beyond the Material
Beyond  the  Material  Plane,  the  various  planes  of   existence  are  realms  of  myth  and  mystery.  They're   not  simply  other  worlds,  but  different  qualities  of   being,  formed  and  governed  by  spiritual  and   elemental  principles  abstracted  from  the  ordinary   world.  

Planar Travel
When  adventurers  travel  into  other  planes  of   existence,  they  are  undertaking  a  legendary  journey   across  the  thresholds  of  existence  to  a  mythic   destination  where  they  strive  to  complete  their   quest.  Such  a  journey  is  the  stuff  of  legend.  Braving   the  realms  of  the  dead,  seeking  out  the  celestial   servants  of  a  deity,  or  bargaining  with  an  efreeti  in   its  home  city  will  be  the  subject  of  song  and  story  for   years  to  come.      Travel  to  the  planes  beyond  the  Material  Plane  can   be  accomplished  in  two  ways:  by  casting  a  spell  or   by  using  a  planar  portal.      Spells.  A  number  of  spells  allow  direct  or  indirect   access  to  other  planes  of  existence.  Plane  shift  and   gate  can  transport  adventurers  directly  to  any  other   plane  of  existence,  with  different  degrees  of   precision.  Etherealness  allows  adventurers  to  enter   the  Ethereal  Plane  and  travel  from  there  to  any  of   the  planes  it  touches--such  as  the  Elemental  Planes.   And  the  astral  projection  spell  lets  adventurers   project  themselves  into  the  Astral  Plane  and  travel   to  the  Outer  Planes.        Portals.  A  portal  is  a  general  term  for  a  stationary   interplanar  connection  that  links  a  specific  location   on  one  plane  to  a  specific  location  on  another.  Some   portals  are  like  doorways,  a  clear  window,  or  a  fog- shrouded  passage,  and  simply  stepping  through  it   effects  the  interplanar  travel.  Others  are  locations-- circles  of  standing  stones,  soaring  towers,  sailing   ships,  or  even  whole  towns--that  exist  in  multiple   planes  at  once  or  flicker  from  one  plane  to  another   in  turn.  Some  are  vortices,  typically  joining  an   Elemental  Plane  with  a  very  similar  location  on  the   Material  Plane,  such  as  the  heart  of  a  volcano   (leading  to  the  Plane  of  Fire)  or  the  depths  of  the   ocean  (to  the  Plane  of  Water).  
Transitive Planes
The  Ethereal  Plane  and  the  Astral  Plane  are  called   the  Transitive  Planes.  They  are  mostly  featureless   realms  that  serve  primarily  as  ways  to  travel  from   one  plane  to  another.  Spells  such  as  etherealness  and   astral  projection  allow  characters  to  enter  these   planes  and  traverse  them  to  reach  the  planes  beyond.      The  Ethereal  Plane  is  a  misty,  fog-bound   dimension  that  is  sometimes  described  as  a  great   ocean.  Its  shores,  called  the  Border  Ethereal,  overlap   the  Material  Plane  and  the  Inner  Planes,  so  that   every  location  on  those  planes  has  a  corresponding   location  on  the  Ethereal  Plane.  Certain  creatures  can   see  into  the  Border  Ethereal,  and  the  see  invisibility  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  5.1  

363  

and  true  seeing  spell  grant  that  ability.  Some  magical   effects  also  extend  from  the  Material  Plane  into  the   Border  Ethereal,  particularly  effects  that  use  force   energy  such  as  forcecage  and  wall  of  force.  The   depths  of  the  plane,  the  Deep  Ethereal,  are  a  region   of  swirling  mists  and  colorful  fogs.      The  Astral  Plane  is  the  realm  of  thought  and   dream,  where  visitors  travel  as  disembodied  souls  to   reach  the  planes  of  the  divine  and  demonic.  It  is  a   great,  silvery  sea,  the  same  above  and  below,  with   swirling  wisps  of  white  and  gray  streaking  among   motes  of  light  resembling  distant  stars.  Erratic   whirlpools  of  color  flicker  in  midair  like  spinning   coins.  Occasional bits  of  solid  matter  can  be  found   here,  but  most  of  the  Astral  Plane  is  an  endless,  open   domain.    
Inner Planes
The  Inner  Planes  surround  and  enfold  the  Material   Plane  and  its  echoes,  providing  the  raw  elemental   substance  from  which  all  the  worlds  were  made.  The   four  Elemental  Planes--Air,  Earth,  Fire,  and   Water--form  a  ring  around  the  Material  Plane,   suspended  within  the  churning  Elemental  Chaos.      At  their  innermost  edges,  where  they  are  closest   to  the  Material  Plane  (in  a  conceptual  if  not  a  literal   geographical  sense),  the  four  Elemental  Planes   resemble  a  world  in  the  Material  Plane.  The  four   elements  mingle  together  as  they  do  in  the  Material   Plane,  forming  land,  sea,  and  sky.  Farther  from  the   Material  Plane,  though,  the  Elemental  Planes  are   both  alien  and  hostile.  Here,  the  elements  exist  in   their  purest  form--great  expanses  of  solid  earth,   blazing  fire,  crystal-clear  water,  and  unsullied  air.   These  regions  are  little-known,  so  when  discussing   the  Plane  of  Fire,  for  example,  a  speaker  usually   means  just  the  border  region.  At  the  farthest  extents   of  the  Inner  Planes,  the  pure  elements  dissolve  and   bleed  together  into  an  unending  tumult  of  clashing   energies  and  colliding  substance,  the  Elemental   Chaos.    
Outer Planes
If  the  Inner  Planes  are  the  raw  matter  and  energy   that  makes  up  the  multiverse,  the  Outer  Planes  are   the  direction,  thought  and  purpose  for  such   construction.  Accordingly,  many  sages  refer  to  the   Outer  Planes  as  divine  planes,  spiritual  planes,  or   godly  planes,  for  the  Outer  Planes  are  best  known  as   the  homes  of  deities.        When  discussing  anything  to  do  with  deities,  the   language  used  must  be  highly  metaphorical.  Their  

actual  homes  are  not  literally  "places"  at  all,  but   exemplify  the  idea  that  the  Outer  Planes  are  realms   of  thought  and  spirit.  As  with  the  Elemental  Planes,   one  can  imagine  the  perceptible  part  of  the  Outer   Planes  as  a  sort  of  border  region,  while  extensive   spiritual  regions  lie  beyond  ordinary  sensory   experience.      Even  in  those  perceptible  regions,  appearances   can  be  deceptive.  Initially,  many  of  the  Outer  Planes   appear  hospitable  and  familiar  to  natives  of  the   Material  Plane.  But  the  landscape  can  change  at  the   whims  of  the  powerful  forces  that  live  on  the  Outer   Planes.  The  desires  of  the  mighty  forces  that  dwell   on  these  planes  can  remake  them  completely,   effectively  erasing  and  rebuilding  existence  itself  to   better  fulfill  their  own  needs.      Distance  is  a  virtually  meaningless  concept  on  the   Outer  Planes.  The  perceptible  regions  of  the  planes   often  seem  quite  small,  but  they  can  also  stretch  on   to  what  seems  like  infinity.  It  might  be  possible  to   take  a  guided  tour  of  the  Nine  Hells,  from  the  first   layer  to  the  ninth,  in  a  single  day--if  the  powers  of   the  Hells  desire  it.  Or  it  could  take  weeks  for   travelers  to  make  a  grueling  trek  across  a  single   layer.      The  most  well-known  Outer  Planes  are  a  group  of   sixteen  planes  that  correspond  to  the  eight   alignments  (excluding  neutrality)  and  the  shades  of   distinction  between  them.  
Outer Planes
The  planes  with  some  element  of  good  in  their   nature  are  called  the  Upper  Planes.  Celestial   creatures  such  as  angels  and  pegasi  dwell  in  the   Upper  Planes.  Planes  with  some  element  of  evil  are   the  Lower  Planes.  Fiends  such  as  demons  and  devils   dwell  in  the  Lower  Planes.  A  plane's  alignment  is  its   essence,  and  a  character  whose  alignment  doesn't   match  the  plane's  experiences  a  profound  sense  of   dissonance  there.  When  a  good  creature  visits   Elysium,  for  example  (a  neutral  good  Upper  Plane),   it  feels  in  tune  with  the  plane,  but  an  evil  creature   feels  out  of  tune  and  more  than  a  little   uncomfortable.  
Demiplanes
Demiplanes  are  small  extradimensional  spaces  with   their  own  unique  rules.  They  are  pieces  of  reality   that  don't  seem  to  fit  anywhere  else.  Demiplanes   come  into  being  by  a  variety  of  means.  Some  are   created  by  spells,  such  as  demiplane,  or  generated  at   the  desire+}  of  [-precious  metals  and  stones,  such-]  {+a  powerful  deity  or  other  force.  They   may  exist  naturally,+}  as  [-coins   and  gems,  within  60  feet-]  {+a  fold+}  of  [-it.  
Actions   Multiattack.  The  xorn  makes  three  claw  attacks  and   one  bite  attack.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  6  (1d6  +  3)  slashing  damage.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  13  (3d6  +  3)  piercing  damage.     
Monsters (Z)
  
Zombies
Zombie  
Medium  undead,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  8   Hit  Points  22  (3d8  +  9)   Speed  20  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      13  (+1)   6  (-2)   16  (+3)   3  (-4)   6  (-2)   5  (-3)  
Saving  Throws  Wis  +0   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  8-]  {+existing  reality  that+}  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

359  

Languages  understands  the  languages  it  knew  in  life   but  can't  speak  
Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)      Undead  Fortitude.  If  damage  reduces-]  {+5.1  

364  

has  been  pinched  off  from+}  the  [-zombie  to  0   hit  points,  it  must  make  a  Constitution  saving  throw   with  a  DC-]  {+rest+}  of  [-5  +  the  damage  taken,  unless-]  the  [-damage   is  radiant-]  {+multiverse,+}   or  [-from-]  {+as+}  a  [-critical  hit.  On-]  {+baby  universe  growing  in  power.  A  given   demiplane  can  be  entered  through+}  a  [-success,  the   zombie  drops  to  1  hit-]  {+single+}  point  [-instead.  
Actions  
Slam.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  4  (1d6  +  1)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Ogre  Zombie  
Large  undead,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  8   Hit  Points  85  (9d10  +  36)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   6  (-2)   18  (+4)   3  (-4)   6  (-2)   5  (-3)  
Saving  Throws  Wis  +0   Damage  Immunities  poison   Condition  Immunities  poisoned   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  8   Languages  understands  Common  and  Giant  but  can't  
speak   Challenge  2  (450  XP)      Undead  Fortitude.  If  damage  reduces  the  zombie  to  0   hit  points,-]   {+where+}  it  [-must  make-]  {+touches  another  plane.  Theoretically,+}  a  [-Constitution  saving  throw   with-]   {+plane  shift  spell  can  also  carry  travelers  to+}  a  [-DC  of  5  +-]   {+demiplane,  but+}  the  [-damage  taken,  unless-]  {+proper  frequency  required  for+}   the  [-damage-]  {+tuning  fork+}  is  [-radiant  or  from  a  critical  hit.  On  a  success,  the   zombie  drops  to  1  hit  point  instead.  
Actions  
Morningstar.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6-]  {+extremely  hard+}  to  [-hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  13  (2d8  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.-]  {+acquire.  The   gate  spell  is  more  reliable,  assuming  the  caster   knows  of  the  demiplane.+}  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

360-]  {+5.1  

365+}  

Appendix [-A:-] {+MM-A:+} Miscellaneous Creatures
This  appendix  contains  statistics  for  various  animals,   vermin,  and  other  critters.  The  stat  blocks  are   organized  alphabetically  by  creature  name.  
Ape  
Medium  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  19  (3d8  +  6)   Speed  30  ft.,  climb  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      16  (+3)   14  (+2)   14  (+2)   6  (-2)   12  (+1)   7  (-2)  
Skills  Athletics  +5,  Perception  +3   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)  
Actions   Multiattack.  The  ape  makes  two  fist  attacks.   Fist.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  6  (1d6  +  3)  bludgeoning  damage.   Rock.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  range  25/50  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  6  (1d6  +  3)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Awakened  Shrub  
Small  plant,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  9   Hit  Points  10  (3d6)   Speed  20  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      3  (-4)   8  (-1)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)   10  (+0)   6  (-2)  
Damage  Vulnerabilities  fire   Damage  Resistances  piercing   Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  one  language  known  by  its  creator   Challenge  0  (10  XP)  

     False  Appearance.  While  the  shrub  remains  motionless,   it  is  indistinguishable  from  a  normal  shrub.  
Actions  
Rake.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +1  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  1  (1d4  -  1)  slashing  damage.      An  awakened  shrub  is  an  ordinary  shrub  given   sentience  and  mobility  by  the  awaken  spell  or   similar  magic.     
Awakened  Tree  
Huge  plant,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  59  (7d12  +  14)   Speed  20  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   6  (-2)   15  (+2)   10  (+0)   10  (+0)   7  (-2)  
Damage  Vulnerabilities  fire   Damage  Resistances  bludgeoning,  piercing   Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  one  language  known  by  its  creator   Challenge  2  (450  XP)        False  Appearance.  While  the  tree  remains  motionless,   it  is  indistinguishable  from  a  normal  tree.  
Actions  
Slam.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  14  (3d6  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.      An  awakened  tree  is  an  ordinary  tree  given   sentience  and  mobility  by  the  awaken  spell  or   similar  magic.     
Axe  Beak  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  11   Hit  Points  19  (3d10  +  3)   Speed  50  ft.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

361-]  {+5.1  

366+}  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      14  (+2)   12  (+1)   12  (+1)   2  (-4)   10  (+0)   5  (-3)  
Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)  
Actions  
Beak.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  6  (1d8  +  2)  slashing  damage.      An  axe  beak  is  a  tall  flightless  bird  with  strong  legs   and  a  heavy,  wedge-shaped  beak.  It  has  a  nasty   disposition  and  tends  to  attack  any  unfamiliar   creature  that  wanders  too  close.     
Baboon  
Small  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  3  (1d6)   Speed  30  ft.,  climb  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      8  (-1)   14  (+2)   11  (+0)   4  (-3)   12  (+1)   6  (-2)  
Senses  passive  Perception  11   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)        Pack  Tactics.  The  baboon  has  advantage  on  an  attack   roll  against  a  creature  if  at  least  one  of  the  baboon's   allies  is  within  5  feet  of  the  creature  and  the  ally  isn't   incapacitated.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +1  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  1  (1d4  -  1)  piercing  damage.     
Badger  
Tiny  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  10   Hit  Points  3  (1d4  +  1)   Speed  20  ft.,  burrow  5  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      4  (-3)   11  (+0)   12  (+1)   2  (-4)   12  (+1)   5  (-3)  

Senses  darkvision  30  ft.,  passive  Perception  11   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)        Keen  Smell.  The  badger  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  smell.  
Actions   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  1  piercing  damage.     
Bat  
Tiny  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  1  (1d4  -  1)   Speed  5  ft.,  fly  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      2  (-4)   15  (+2)   8  (-1)   2  (-4)   12  (+1)   4  (-3)  
Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  11   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)        Echolocation.  The  bat  can't  use  its  blindsight  while   deafened.   Keen  Hearing.  The  bat  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  hearing.  
Actions   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +0  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  1  piercing  damage.     
Black  Bear  
Medium  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  11  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  19  (3d8  +  6)   Speed  40  ft.,  climb  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   10  (+0)   14  (+2)   2  (-4)   12  (+1)   7  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +3   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

362-]  {+5.1  

367+}  

Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)        Keen  Smell.  The  bear  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  smell.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  bear  makes  two  attacks:  one  with  its   bite  and  one  with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing  damage.   Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (2d4  +  2)  slashing  damage.     
Blink  Dog  
Medium  fey,  lawful  good  
Armor  Class  13   Hit  Points  22  (4d8  +  4)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      12  (+1)   17  (+3)   12  (+1)   10  (+0)   13  (+1)   11  (+0)  
Skills  Perception  +3,  Stealth  +5   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  Blink  Dog,  understands  Sylvan  but  can't  
speak  it   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)        Keen  Hearing  and  Smell.  The  dog  has  advantage  on   Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  hearing  or   smell.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  4  (1d6  +  1)  piercing  damage.   Teleport  (Recharge  4­6).  The  dog  magically  teleports,   along  with  any  equipment  it  is  wearing  or  carrying,  up   to  40  feet  to  an  unoccupied  space  it  can  see.  Before  or   after  teleporting,  the  dog  can  make  one  bite  attack.      A  blink  dog  takes  its  name  from  its  ability  to  blink  in   and  out  of  existence,  a  talent  it  uses  to  aid  its  attacks   and  to  avoid  harm.  [-Blink  dogs  harbor  a  long- standing  hatred  for  displacer  beasts  and  attack  them   on  sight.-]     

Blood  Hawk  
Small  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  7  (2d6)   Speed  10  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      6  (-2)   14  (+2)   10  (+0)   3  (-4)   14  (+2)   5  (-3)  
Skills  Perception  +4   Senses  passive  Perception  14   Languages  --   Challenge  1/8  (25  XP)        Keen  Sight.  The  hawk  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  sight.   Pack  Tactics.  The  hawk  has  advantage  on  an  attack  roll   against  a  creature  if  at  least  one  of  the  hawk's  allies  is   within  5  feet  of  the  creature  and  the  ally  isn't   incapacitated.  
Actions  
Beak.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  4  (1d4  +  2)  piercing  damage.      Taking  its  name  from  its  crimson  feathers  and   aggressive  nature,  the  blood  hawk  fearlessly  attacks   almost  any  animal,  stabbing  it  with  its  daggerlike   beak.  Blood  hawks  flock  together  in  large  numbers,   attacking  as  a  pack  to  take  down  prey.     
Boar  
Medium  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  11  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  11  (2d8  +  2)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      13  (+1)   11  (+0)   12  (+1)   2  (-4)   9  (-1)   5  (-3)  
Senses  passive  Perception  9   Languages  --   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)        Charge.  If  the  boar  moves  at  least  20  feet  straight   toward  a  target  and  then  hits  it  with  a  tusk  attack  on  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

363-]  {+5.1  

368+}  

the  same  turn,  the  target  takes  an  extra  3  (1d6)   slashing  damage.  If  the  target  is  a  creature,  it  must   succeed  on  a  DC  11  Strength  saving  throw  or  be   knocked  prone.   Relentless  (Recharges  after  a  Short  or  Long  Rest).  If   the  boar  takes  7  damage  or  less  that  would  reduce  it  to   0  hit  points,  it  is  reduced  to  1  hit  point  instead.  
Actions  
Tusk.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  4  (1d6  +  1)  slashing  damage.     
Brown  Bear  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  11  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  34  (4d10  +  12)   Speed  40  ft.,  climb  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   10  (+0)   16  (+3)   2  (-4)   13  (+1)   7  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +3   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  1  (200  XP)        Keen  Smell.  The  bear  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  smell.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  bear  makes  two  attacks:  one  with  its   bite  and  one  with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  8  (1d8  +  4)  piercing  damage.   Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  slashing  damage.     
Camel  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  9   Hit  Points  15  (2d10  +  4)   Speed  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      16  (+3)   8  (-1)   14  (+2)   2  (-4)   8  (-1)   5  (-3)  

Senses  passive  Perception  9   Languages  --   Challenge  1/8  (25  XP)  
Actions   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  2  (1d4)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Cat  
Tiny  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  2  (1d4)   Speed  40  ft.,  climb  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      3  (-4)   15  (+2)   10  (+0)   3  (-4)   12  (+1)   7  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +3,  Stealth  +4   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)        Keen  Smell.  The  cat  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  smell.  
Actions   Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +0  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  1  slashing  damage.     
Constrictor  Snake  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  13  (2d10  +  2)   Speed  30  ft.,  swim  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   14  (+2)   12  (+1)   1  (-5)   10  (+0)   3  (-4)  
Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)  
Actions   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing  damage.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

364-]  {+5.1  

369+}  

Constrict.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  creature.  Hit:  6  (1d8  +  2)  bludgeoning  damage,  and   the  target  is  grappled  (escape  DC  14).  Until  this  grapple   ends,  the  creature  is  restrained,  and  the  snake  can't   constrict  another  target.     
Crab  
Tiny  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  11  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  2  (1d4)   Speed  20  ft.,  swim  20  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      2  (-4)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)   1  (-5)   8  (-1)   2  (-4)  
Skills  Stealth  +2   Senses  blindsight  30  ft.,  passive  Perception  9   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)        Amphibious.  The  crab  can  breathe  air  and  water.  
Actions   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +0  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  1  bludgeoning  damage.     
Crocodile  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  19  (3d10  +  3)   Speed  20  ft.,  swim  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   10  (+0)   13  (+1)   2  (-4)   10  (+0)   5  (-3)  
Skills  Stealth  +2   Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)        Hold  Breath.  The  crocodile  can  hold  its  breath  for  15   minutes.  
Actions   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  7  (1d10  +  2)  piercing  damage,  and  the  

target  is  grappled  (escape  DC  12).  Until  this  grapple   ends,  the  target  is  restrained,  and  the  crocodile  can't   bite  another  target.  
  
Death  Dog  
Medium  monstrosity,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  12  
Hit  Points  39  (6d8  +  12)  
Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   15  (+2)   14  (+2)   14  (+2)   3  (-4)   13  (+1)   6  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +5,  Stealth  +4  
Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  15  
Languages  --  
Challenge  1  (200  XP)  
    
Two-Headed.  The  dog  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  and  on  saving  throws  against  being   blinded,  charmed,  deafened,  frightened,  stunned,  or   knocked  unconscious.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  dog  makes  two  bite  attacks.  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing  damage.  If  the  target  is   a  creature,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  12  Constitution   saving  throw  against  disease  or  become  poisoned  until   the  disease  is  cured.  Every  24  hours  that  elapse,  the   creature  must  repeat  the  saving  throw,  reducing  its  hit   point  maximum  by  5  (1d10)  on  a  failure.  This  reduction   lasts  until  the  disease  is  cured.  The  creature  dies  if  the   disease  reduces  its  hit  point  maximum  to  0.  
   A  death  dog  is  an  ugly  two-headed  hound  that   roams  plains,  and  deserts.  Hate  burns  in  a  death   dog's  heart,  and  a  taste  for  humanoid  flesh  drives  it   to  attack  travelers  and  explorers.  Death  dog  saliva   carries  a  foul  disease  that  causes  a  victim's  flesh  to   slowly  rot  off  the  bone.     
Deer  
Medium  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13  
Hit  Points  4  (1d8)  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

365-]  {+5.1  

370+}  

Speed  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      11  (+0)   16  (+3)   11  (+0)   2  (-4)   14  (+2)   5  (-3)  
Senses  passive  Perception  12   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  2  (1d4)  piercing  damage.     
Dire  Wolf  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  14  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  37  (5d10  +  10)   Speed  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      17  (+3)   15  (+2)   15  (+2)   3  (-4)   12  (+1)   7  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +3,  Stealth  +4   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  1  (200  XP)        Keen  Hearing  and  Smell.  The  wolf  has  advantage  on   Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  hearing  or   smell.   Pack  Tactics.  The  wolf  has  advantage  on  an  attack  roll   against  a  creature  if  at  least  one  of  the  wolf's  allies  is   within  5  feet  of  the  creature  and  the  ally  isn't   incapacitated.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  10  (2d6  +  3)  piercing  damage.  If  the  target  is   a  creature,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  13  Strength  saving   throw  or  be  knocked  prone.     
Draft  Horse  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  10   Hit  Points  19  (3d10  +  3)   Speed  40  ft.  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   10  (+0)   12  (+1)   2  (-4)   11  (+0)   7  (-2)  
Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)  
Actions   Hooves.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  9  (2d4  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Eagle  
Small  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  3  (1d6)   Speed  10  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      6  (-2)   15  (+2)   10  (+0)   2  (-4)   14  (+2)   7  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +4   Senses  passive  Perception  14   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)        Keen  Sight.  The  eagle  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  sight.  
Actions   Talons.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  4  (1d4  +  2)  slashing  damage.     
Elephant  
Huge  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  76  (8d12  +  24)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      22  (+6)   9  (-1)   17  (+3)   3  (-4)   11  (+0)   6  (-2)  
Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  4  (1,100  XP)       

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

366-]  {+5.1  

371+}  

Trampling  Charge.  If  the  elephant  moves  at  least  20   feet  straight  toward  a  creature  and  then  hits  it  with  a   gore  attack  on  the  same  turn,  that  target  must  succeed   on  a  DC  12  Strength  saving  throw  or  be  knocked  prone.   If  the  target  is  prone,  the  elephant  can  make  one   stomp  attack  against  it  as  a  bonus  action.  
Actions  
Gore.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  19  (3d8  +  6)  piercing  damage.   Stomp.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  prone  creature.  Hit:  22  (3d10  +  6)  bludgeoning   damage.     
Elk  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  10   Hit  Points  13  (2d10  +  2)   Speed  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      16  (+3)   10  (+0)   12  (+1)   2  (-4)   10  (+0)   6  (-2)  
Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)        Charge.  If  the  elk  moves  at  least  20  feet  straight   toward  a  target  and  then  hits  it  with  a  ram  attack  on   the  same  turn,  the  target  takes  an  extra  7  (2d6)   damage.  If  the  target  is  a  creature,  it  must  succeed  on   a  DC  13  Strength  saving  throw  or  be  knocked  prone.  
Actions  
Ram.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  6  (1d6  +  3)  bludgeoning  damage.   Hooves.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  prone  creature.  Hit:  8  (2d4  +  3)  bludgeoning   damage.     
Flying  Snake  
Tiny  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  14   Hit  Points  5  (2d4)   Speed  30  ft.,  fly  60  ft.,  swim  30  ft.  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      4  (-3)   18  (+4)   11  (+0)   2  (-4)   12  (+1)   5  (-3)  
Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  passive  Perception  11   Languages  --   Challenge  1/8  (25  XP)        Flyby.  The  snake  doesn't  provoke  opportunity  attacks   when  it  flies  out  of  an  enemy's  reach.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  1  piercing  damage  plus  7  (3d4)  poison   damage.      A  flying  snake  is  a  brightly  colored,  winged  serpent   found  in  remote  jungles.  Tribespeople  and  cultists   sometimes  domesticate  flying  snakes  to  serve  as   messengers  that  deliver  scrolls  wrapped  in  their   coils.     
Frog  
Tiny  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  11   Hit  Points  1  (1d4  -  1)   Speed  20  ft.,  swim  20  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      1  (-5)   13  (+1)   8  (-1)   1  (-5)   8  (-1)   3  (-4)  
Skills  Perception  +1,  Stealth  +3   Senses  darkvision  30  ft.,  passive  Perception  11   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (0  XP)        Amphibious.  The  frog  can  breathe  air  and  water.   Standing  Leap.  The  frog's  long  jump  is  up  to  10  feet   and  its  high  jump  is  up  to  5  feet,  with  or  without  a   running  start.      A  frog  has  no  effective  attacks.  It  feeds  on  small   insects  and  typically  dwells  near  water,  in  trees,  or   underground.  The  frog's  statistics  can  also  be  used  to   represent  a  toad.     

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

367-]  {+5.1  

372+}  

Giant  Ape  
Huge  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  157  (15d12  +  60)   Speed  40  ft.,  climb  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      23  (+6)   14  (+2)   18  (+4)   7  (-2)   12  (+1)   7  (-2)  
Skills  Athletics  +9,  Perception  +4   Senses  passive  Perception  14   Languages  --   Challenge  7  (2,900  XP)  
Actions   Multiattack.  The  ape  makes  two  fist  attacks.   Fist.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  22  (3d10  +  6)  bludgeoning  damage.   Rock.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  range  50/100   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  30  (7d6  +  6)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Giant  Badger  
Medium  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  10   Hit  Points  13  (2d8  +  4)   Speed  30  ft.,  burrow  10  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      13  (+1)   10  (+0)   15  (+2)   2  (-4)   12  (+1)   5  (-3)  
Senses  darkvision  30  ft.,  passive  Perception  11   Languages  --   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)        Keen  Smell.  The  badger  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  smell.  
Actions   Multiattack.  The  badger  makes  two  attacks:  one  with   its  bite  and  one  with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  4  (1d6  +  1)  piercing  damage.   Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  6  (2d4  +  1)  slashing  damage.     

Giant  Bat  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13   Hit  Points  22  (4d10)   Speed  10  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   16  (+3)   11  (+0)   2  (-4)   12  (+1)   6  (-2)  
Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  11   Languages  --   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)        Echolocation.  The  bat  can't  use  its  blindsight  while   deafened.   Keen  Hearing.  The  bat  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  hearing.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing  damage.     
Giant  Boar  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  42  (5d10  +  15)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      17  (+3)   10  (+0)   16  (+3)   2  (-4)   7  (-2)   5  (-3)  
Senses  passive  Perception  8   Languages  --   Challenge  2  (450  XP)        Charge.  If  the  boar  moves  at  least  20  feet  straight   toward  a  target  and  then  hits  it  with  a  tusk  attack  on   the  same  turn,  the  target  takes  an  extra  7  (2d6)   slashing  damage.  If  the  target  is  a  creature,  it  must   succeed  on  a  DC  13  Strength  saving  throw  or  be   knocked  prone.   Relentless  (Recharges  after  a  Short  or  Long  Rest).  If   the  boar  takes  10  damage  or  less  that  would  reduce  it   to  0  hit  points,  it  is  reduced  to  1  hit  point  instead.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

368-]  {+5.1  

373+}  

Actions  
Tusk.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  10  (2d6  +  3)  slashing  damage.     
Giant  Centipede  
Small  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  4  (1d6  +  1)   Speed  30  ft.,  climb  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      5  (-3)   14  (+2)   12  (+1)   1  (-5)   7  (-2)   3  (-4)  
Senses  blindsight  30  ft.,  passive  Perception  8   Languages  --   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  4  (1d4  +  2)  piercing  damage,  and  the   target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  11  Constitution  saving   throw  or  take  10  (3d6)  poison  damage.  If  the  poison   damage  reduces  the  target  to  0  hit  points,  the  target  is   stable  but  poisoned  for  1  hour,  even  after  regaining  hit   points,  and  is  paralyzed  while  poisoned  in  this  way.     
Giant  Constrictor  Snake  
Huge  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  60  (8d12  +  8)   Speed  30  ft.,  swim  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   14  (+2)   12  (+1)   1  (-5)   10  (+0)   3  (-4)  
Skills  Perception  +2   Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  passive  Perception  12   Languages  --   Challenge  2  (450  XP)  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  piercing  damage.   Constrict.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  creature.  Hit:  13  (2d8  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage,   and  the  target  is  grappled  (escape  DC  16).  Until  this  

grapple  ends,  the  creature  is  restrained,  and  the  snake   can't  constrict  another  target.     
Giant  Crab  
Medium  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  15  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  13  (3d8)   Speed  30  ft.,  swim  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      13  (+1)   15  (+2)   11  (+0)   1  (-5)   9  (-1)   3  (-4)  
Skills  Stealth  +4   Senses  blindsight  30  ft.,  passive  Perception  9   Languages  --   Challenge  1/8  (25  XP)        Amphibious.  The  crab  can  breathe  air  and  water.  
Actions   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  4  (1d6  +  1)  bludgeoning  damage,  and  the   target  is  grappled  (escape  DC  11).  The  crab  has  two   claws,  each  of  which  can  grapple  only  one  target.     
Giant  Crocodile  
Huge  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  14  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  85  (9d12  +  27)   Speed  30  ft.,  swim  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      21  (+5)   9  (-1)   17  (+3)   2  (-4)   10  (+0)   7  (-2)  
Skills  Stealth  +5   Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)        Hold  Breath.  The  crocodile  can  hold  its  breath  for  30   minutes.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  crocodile  makes  two  attacks:  one   with  its  bite  and  one  with  its  tail.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

369-]  {+5.1  

374+}  

Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  21  (3d10  +  5)  piercing  damage,  and  the   target  is  grappled  (escape  DC  16).  Until  this  grapple   ends,  the  target  is  restrained,  and  the  crocodile  can't   bite  another  target.   Tail.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +8  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   target  not  grappled  by  the  crocodile.  Hit:  14  (2d8  +  5)   bludgeoning  damage.  If  the  target  is  a  creature,  it  must   succeed  on  a  DC  16  Strength  saving  throw  or  be   knocked  prone.     
Giant  Eagle  
Large  beast,  neutral  good  
Armor  Class  13   Hit  Points  26  (4d10  +  4)   Speed  10  ft.,  fly  80  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      16  (+3)   17  (+3)   13  (+1)   8  (-1)   14  (+2)   10  (+0)  
Skills  Perception  +4   Senses  passive  Perception  14   Languages  Giant  Eagle,  understands  Common  and  
Auran  but  can't  speak  them   Challenge  1  (200  XP)        Keen  Sight.  The  eagle  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  sight.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  eagle  makes  two  attacks:  one  with  its   beak  and  one  with  its  talons.   Beak.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  6  (1d6  +  3)  piercing  damage.   Talons.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  10  (2d6  +  3)  slashing  damage.      A  giant  eagle  is  a  noble  creature  that  speaks  its  own   language  and  understands  speech  in  the  Common   tongue.  A  mated  pair  of  giant  eagles  typically  has  up   to  four  eggs  or  young  in  their  nest  (treat  the  young   as  normal  eagles).  
Giant  Elk  
Huge  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  14  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  42  (5d12  +  10)  

Speed  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   16  (+3)   14  (+2)   7  (-2)   14  (+2)   10  (+0)  
Skills  Perception  +4   Senses  passive  Perception  14   Languages  Giant  Elk,  understands  Common,  Elvish,  and  
Sylvan  but  can't  speak  them   Challenge  2  (450  XP)        Charge.  If  the  elk  moves  at  least  20  feet  straight   toward  a  target  and  then  hits  it  with  a  ram  attack  on   the  same  turn,  the  target  takes  an  extra  7  (2d6)   damage.  If  the  target  is  a  creature,  it  must  succeed  on   a  DC  14  Strength  saving  throw  or  be  knocked  prone.  
Actions  
Ram.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.   Hooves.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  prone  creature.  Hit:  22  (4d8  +  4)  bludgeoning   damage.      The  majestic  giant  elk  is  rare  to  the  point  that  its   appearance  is  often  taken  as  a  foreshadowing  of  an   important  event,  such  as  the  birth  of  a  king.  Legends   tell  of  gods  that  take  the  form  of  giant  elk  when   visiting  the  Material  Plane.  Many  cultures  therefore   believe  that  to  hunt  these  creatures  is  to  invite   divine  wrath.     
Giant  Fire  Beetle  
Small  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  4  (1d6  +  1)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      8  (-1)   10  (+0)   12  (+1)   1  (-5)   7  (-2)   3  (-4)  
Senses  blindsight  30  ft.,  passive  Perception  8   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)        Illumination.  The  beetle  sheds  bright  light  in  a  10-foot   radius  and  dim  light  for  an  additional  10  feet.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

370-]  {+5.1  

375+}  

Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +1  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  2  (1d6  -  1)  slashing  damage.  
   A  giant  fire  beetle  is  a  nocturnal  creature  that  takes   its  name  from  a  pair  of  glowing  glands  that  give  off   light.  Miners  and  adventurers  prize  these  creatures,   for  a  giant  fire  beetle's  glands  continue  to  shed  light   for  1d6  days  after  the  beetle  dies.  Giant  fire  beetles   are  most  commonly  found  underground  and  in  dark   forests.     
Giant  Frog  
Medium  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  11  
Hit  Points  18  (4d8)  
Speed  30  ft.,  swim  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   12  (+1)   13  (+1)   11  (+0)   2  (-4)   10  (+0)   3  (-4)  
Skills  Perception  +2,  Stealth  +3  
Senses  darkvision  30  ft.,  passive  Perception  12  
Languages  --  
Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)  
    
Amphibious.  The  frog  can  breathe  air  and  water.  
Standing  Leap.  The  frog's  long  jump  is  up  to  20  feet   and  its  high  jump  is  up  to  10  feet,  with  or  without  a   running  start.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  4  (1d6  +  1)  piercing  damage,  and  the  target   is  grappled  (escape  DC  11).  Until  this  grapple  ends,  the   target  is  restrained,  and  the  frog  can't  bite  another   target.  
Swallow.  The  frog  makes  one  bite  attack  against  a   Small  or  smaller  target  it  is  grappling.  If  the  attack  hits,   the  target  is  swallowed,  and  the  grapple  ends.  The   swallowed  target  is  blinded  and  restrained,  it  has  total   cover  against  attacks  and  other  effects  outside  the  frog,   and  it  takes  5  (2d4)  acid  damage  at  the  start  of  each  of   the  frog's  turns.  The  frog  can  have  only  one  target   swallowed  at  a  time.      If  the  frog  dies,  a  swallowed  creature  is  no  longer   restrained  by  it  and  can  escape  from  the  corpse  using  5  

feet  of  movement,  exiting  prone.     
Giant  Goat  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  11  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  19  (3d10  +  3)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      17  (+3)   11  (+0)   12  (+1)   3  (-4)   12  (+1)   6  (-2)  
Senses  passive  Perception  11   Languages  --   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)        Charge.  If  the  goat  moves  at  least  20  feet  straight   toward  a  target  and  then  hits  it  with  a  ram  attack  on   the  same  turn,  the  target  takes  an  extra  5  (2d4)   bludgeoning  damage.  If  the  target  is  a  creature,  it  must   succeed  on  a  DC  13  Strength  saving  throw  or  be   knocked  prone.   Sure-Footed.  The  goat  has  advantage  on  Strength  and   Dexterity  saving  throws  made  against  effects  that   would  knock  it  prone.  
Actions  
Ram.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  8  (2d4  +  3)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Giant  Hyena  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  45  (6d10  +  12)   Speed  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      16  (+3)   14  (+2)   14  (+2)   2  (-4)   12  (+1)   7  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +3   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  1  (200  XP)        Rampage.  When  the  hyena  reduces  a  creature  to  0  hit   points  with  a  melee  attack  on  its  turn,  the  hyena  can  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

371-]  {+5.1  

376+}  

take  a  bonus  action  to  move  up  to  half  its  speed  and   make  a  bite  attack.  
Actions   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  10  (2d6  +  3)  piercing  damage.     
Giant  Lizard  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  19  (3d10  +  3)   Speed  30  ft.,  climb  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   12  (+1)   13  (+1)   2  (-4)   10  (+0)   5  (-3)  
Senses  darkvision  30  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)  
Actions   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  6  (1d8  +  2)  piercing  damage.      A  giant  lizard  can  be  ridden  or  used  as  a  draft   animal.  Lizardfolk  also  keep  them  as  pets,  and   subterranean  giant  lizards  are  used  as  mounts  and   pack  animals  by  drow,  duergar,  and  others.     
Giant  Octopus  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  11   Hit  Points  52  (8d10  +  8)   Speed  10  ft.,  swim  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      17  (+3)   13  (+1)   13  (+1)   4  (-3)   10  (+0)   4  (-3)  
Skills  Perception  +4,  Stealth  +5   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  14   Languages  --   Challenge  1  (200  XP)        Hold  Breath.  While  out  of  water,  the  octopus  can  hold   its  breath  for  1  hour.  

Underwater  Camouflage.  The  octopus  has  advantage   on  Dexterity  (Stealth)  checks  made  while  underwater.   Water  Breathing.  The  octopus  can  breathe  only   underwater.  
Actions  
Tentacles.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  15  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  10  (2d6  +  3)  bludgeoning  damage.  If   the  target  is  a  creature,  it  is  grappled  (escape  DC  16).   Until  this  grapple  ends,  the  target  is  restrained,  and  the   octopus  can't  use  its  tentacles  on  another  target.   Ink  Cloud  (Recharges  after  a  Short  or  Long  Rest).  A  20- foot-radius  cloud  of  ink  extends  all  around  the  octopus   if  it  is  underwater.  The  area  is  heavily  obscured  for  1   minute,  although  a  significant  current  can  disperse  the   ink.  After  releasing  the  ink,  the  octopus  can  use  the   Dash  action  as  a  bonus  action.     
Giant  Owl  
Large  beast,  neutral  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  19  (3d10  +  3)   Speed  5  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      13  (+1)   15  (+2)   12  (+1)   8  (-1)   13  (+1)   10  (+0)  
Skills  Perception  +5,  Stealth  +4   Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  15   Languages  Giant  Owl,  understands  Common,  Elvish,  
and  Sylvan  but  can't  speak  them   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)        Flyby.  The  owl  doesn't  provoke  opportunity  attacks   when  it  flies  out  of  an  enemy's  reach.   Keen  Hearing  and  Sight.  The  owl  has  advantage  on   Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  hearing  or   sight.  
Actions  
Talons.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  8  (2d6  +  1)  slashing  damage.      Giant  owls  often  befriend  fey  and  other  sylvan   creatures  and  are  guardians  of  their  woodland   realms.     

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

372-]  {+5.1  

377+}  

Giant  Poisonous  Snake  
Medium  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  14   Hit  Points  11  (2d8  +  2)   Speed  30  ft.,  swim  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      10  (+0)   18  (+4)   13  (+1)   2  (-4)   10  (+0)   3  (-4)  
Skills  Perception  +2   Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  passive  Perception  12   Languages  --   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  6  (1d4  +  4)  piercing  damage,  and  the  target   must  make  a  DC  11  Constitution  saving  throw,  taking   10  (3d6)  poison  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as   much  damage  on  a  successful  one.     
Giant  Rat  
Small  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  7  (2d6)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      7  (-2)   15  (+2)   11  (+0)   2  (-4)   10  (+0)   4  (-3)  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  1/8  (25  XP)        Keen  Smell.  The  rat  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  smell.   Pack  Tactics.  The  rat  has  advantage  on  an  attack  roll   against  a  creature  if  at  least  one  of  the  rat's  allies  is   within  5  feet  of  the  creature  and  the  ally  isn't   incapacitated.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  4  (1d4  +  2)  piercing  damage.     

Variant: Diseased Giant Rats
Some  giant  rats  carry  vile  diseases  that  they  spread  with  their   bites.  A  diseased  giant  rat  has  a  challenge  rating  of  1/8  (25   XP)  and  the  following  action  instead  of  its  normal  bite  attack.      Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  4  (1d4  +  2)  piercing  damage.  If  the  target  is  a   creature,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  10  Constitution  saving   throw  or  contract  a  disease.  Until  the  disease  is  cured,  the   target  can't  regain  hit  points  except  by  magical  means,  and   the  target's  hit  point  maximum  decreases  by  3  (1d6)  every  24   hours.  If  the  target's  hit  point  maximum  drops  to  0  as  a  result   of  this  disease,  the  target  dies.  
  
Giant  Scorpion  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  15  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  52  (7d10  +  14)  
Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   13  (+1)   15  (+2)   1  (-5)   9  (-1)   3  (-4)  
Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  9  
Languages  --   Challenge  3  (700  XP)  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  scorpion  makes  three  attacks:  two   with  its  claws  and  one  with  its  sting.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  6  (1d8  +  2)  bludgeoning  damage,  and  the   target  is  grappled  (escape  DC  12).  The  scorpion  has  two   claws,  each  of  which  can  grapple  only  one  target.   Sting.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  7  (1d10  +  2)  piercing  damage,  and  the   target  must  make  a  DC  12  Constitution  saving  throw,   taking  22  (4d10)  poison  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or   half  as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.  
  
Giant  Sea  Horse  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  16  (3d10)   Speed  0  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      12  (+1)   15  (+2)   11  (+0)   2  (-4)   12  (+1)   5  (-3)  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

373-]  {+5.1  

378+}  

Senses  passive  Perception  11   Languages  --   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)        Charge.  If  the  sea  horse  moves  at  least  20  feet  straight   toward  a  target  and  then  hits  it  with  a  ram  attack  on   the  same  turn,  the  target  takes  an  extra  7  (2d6)   bludgeoning  damage.  It  the  target  is  a  creature,  it  must   succeed  on  a  DC  11  Strength  saving  throw  or  be   knocked  prone.   Water  Breathing.  The  sea  horse  can  breathe  only   underwater.  
Actions  
Ram.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  4  (1d6  +  1)  bludgeoning  damage.      Like  their  smaller  kin,  giant  sea  horses  are  shy,   colorful  fish  with  elongated  bodies  and  curled  tails.   Aquatic  elves  train  them  as  mounts.     
Giant  Shark  
Huge  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  126  (11d12  +  55)   Speed  0  ft.,  swim  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      23  (+6)   11  (+0)   21  (+5)   1  (-5)   10  (+0)   5  (-3)  
Skills  Perception  +3   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)        Blood  Frenzy.  The  shark  has  advantage  on  melee  attack   rolls  against  any  creature  that  doesn't  have  all  its  hit   points.   Water  Breathing.  The  shark  can  breathe  only   underwater.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +9  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  22  (3d10  +  6)  piercing  damage.     

A  giant  shark  is  30  feet  long  and  normally  found  in   deep  oceans.  Utterly  fearless,  it  preys  on  anything   that  crosses  its  path,  including  whales  and  ships.     
Giant  Spider  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  14  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  26  (4d10  +  4)  
Speed  30  ft.,  climb  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   14  (+2)   16  (+3)   12  (+1)   2  (-4)   11  (+0)   4  (-3)  
Skills  Stealth  +7  
Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive   Perception  10  
Languages  --  
Challenge  1  (200  XP)  
    
Spider  Climb.  The  spider  can  climb  difficult  surfaces,   including  upside  down  on  ceilings,  without  needing  to   make  an  ability  check.  
Web  Sense.  While  in  contact  with  a  web,  the  spider   knows  the  exact  location  of  any  other  creature  in   contact  with  the  same  web.  
Web  Walker.  The  spider  ignores  movement  restrictions   caused  by  webbing.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  7  (1d8  +  3)  piercing  damage,  and  the   target  must  make  a  DC  11  Constitution  saving  throw,   taking  9  (2d8)  poison  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half   as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.  If  the  poison   damage  reduces  the  target  to  0  hit  points,  the  target  is   stable  but  poisoned  for  1  hour,  even  after  regaining  hit   points,  and  is  paralyzed  while  poisoned  in  this  way.  
Web  (Recharge  5­6).  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,   range  30/60  ft.,  one  creature.  Hit:  The  target  is   restrained  by  webbing.  As  an  action,  the  restrained   target  can  make  a  DC  12  Strength  check,  bursting  the   webbing  on  a  success.  The  webbing  can  also  be   attacked  and  destroyed  (AC  10;  hp  5;  vulnerability  to   fire  damage;  immunity  to  bludgeoning,  poison,  and   psychic  damage).  
  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

374-]  {+5.1  

379+}  

To  snare  its  prey,  a  giant  spider  spins  elaborate   webs  or  shoots  sticky  strands  of  webbing  from  its   abdomen.  Giant  spiders  are  most  commonly  found   underground,  making  their  lairs  on  ceilings  or  in   dark,  web-filled  crevices.  Such  lairs  are  often   festooned  with  web  cocoons  holding  past  victims.     
Giant  Toad  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  11  
Hit  Points  39  (6d10  +  6)  
Speed  20  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   15  (+2)   13  (+1)   13  (+1)   2  (-4)   10  (+0)   3  (-4)  
Senses  darkvision  30  ft.,  passive  Perception  10  
Languages  --  
Challenge  1  (200  XP)  
    
Amphibious.  The  toad  can  breathe  air  and  water.  
Standing  Leap.  The  toad's  long  jump  is  up  to  20  feet   and  its  high  jump  is  up  to  10  feet,  with  or  without  a   running  start.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (1d10  +  2)  piercing  damage  plus  5  (1d10)   poison  damage,  and  the  target  is  grappled  (escape  DC   13).  Until  this  grapple  ends,  the  target  is  restrained,   and  the  toad  can't  bite  another  target.  
Swallow.  The  toad  makes  one  bite  attack  against  a   Medium  or  smaller  target  it  is  grappling.  If  the  attack   hits,  the  target  is  swallowed,  and  the  grapple  ends.  The   swallowed  target  is  blinded  and  restrained,  it  has  total   cover  against  attacks  and  other  effects  outside  the   toad,  and  it  takes  10  (3d6)  acid  damage  at  the  start  of   each  of  the  toad's  turns.  The  toad  can  have  only  one   target  swallowed  at  a  time.      If  the  toad  dies,  a  swallowed  creature  is  no  longer   restrained  by  it  and  can  escape  from  the  corpse  using  5   feet  of  movement,  exiting  prone.  
  
Giant  Vulture  
Large  beast,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  10  
Hit  Points  22  (3d10  +  6)  

Speed  10  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   10  (+0)   15  (+2)   6  (-2)   12  (+1)   7  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +3   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  understands  Common  but  can't  speak   Challenge  1  (200  XP)        Keen  Sight  and  Smell.  The  vulture  has  advantage  on   Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  sight  or  smell.   Pack  Tactics.  The  vulture  has  advantage  on  an  attack   roll  against  a  creature  if  at  least  one  of  the  vulture's   allies  is  within  5  feet  of  the  creature  and  the  ally  isn't   incapacitated.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  vulture  makes  two  attacks:  one  with   its  beak  and  one  with  its  talons.   Beak.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (2d4  +  2)  piercing  damage.   Talons.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  9  (2d6  +  2)  slashing  damage.      A  giant  vulture  has  advanced  intelligence  and  a   malevolent  bent.  Unlike  its  smaller  kin,  it  will  attack   a  wounded  creature  to  hasten  its  end.  Giant  vultures   have  been  known  to  haunt  a  thirsty,  starving   creature  for  days  to  enjoy  its  suffering.     
Giant  Wasp  
Medium  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  13  (3d8)   Speed  10  ft.,  fly  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      10  (+0)   14  (+2)   10  (+0)   1  (-5)   10  (+0)   3  (-4)  
Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)  
Actions  
Sting.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing  damage,  and  the  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

375-]  {+5.1  

380+}  

target  must  make  a  DC  11  Constitution  saving  throw,   taking  10  (3d6)  poison  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half   as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.  If  the  poison   damage  reduces  the  target  to  0  hit  points,  the  target  is   stable  but  poisoned  for  1  hour,  even  after  regaining  hit   points,  and  is  paralyzed  while  poisoned  in  this  way.     
Giant  Weasel  
Medium  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13   Hit  Points  9  (2d8)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      11  (+0)   16  (+3)   10  (+0)   4  (-3)   12  (+1)   5  (-3)  
Skills  Perception  +3,  Stealth  +5   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  1/8  (25  XP)        Keen  Hearing  and  Smell.  The  weasel  has  advantage  on   Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  hearing  or   smell.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  5  (1d4  +  3)  piercing  damage.     
Giant  Wolf  Spider  
Medium  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13   Hit  Points  11  (2d8  +  2)   Speed  40  ft.,  climb  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      12  (+1)   16  (+3)   13  (+1)   3  (-4)   12  (+1)   4  (-3)  
Skills  Perception  +3,  Stealth  +7   Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  
Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)       

Spider  Climb.  The  spider  can  climb  difficult  surfaces,   including  upside  down  on  ceilings,  without  needing  to   make  an  ability  check.  
Web  Sense.  While  in  contact  with  a  web,  the  spider   knows  the  exact  location  of  any  other  creature  in   contact  with  the  same  web.  
Web  Walker.  The  spider  ignores  movement  restrictions   caused  by  webbing.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  4  (1d6  +  1)  piercing  damage,  and  the   target  must  make  a  DC  11  Constitution  saving  throw,   taking  7  (2d6)  poison  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half   as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.  If  the  poison   damage  reduces  the  target  to  0  hit  points,  the  target  is   stable  but  poisoned  for  1  hour,  even  after  regaining  hit   points,  and  is  paralyzed  while  poisoned  in  this  way.  
   Smaller  than  a  giant  spider,  a  giant  wolf  spider   hunts  prey  across  open  ground  or  hides  in  a  burrow   or  crevice,  or  in  a  hidden  cavity  beneath  debris.     
Goat  
Medium  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  10  
Hit  Points  4  (1d8)  
Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   12  (+1)   10  (+0)   11  (+0)   2  (-4)   10  (+0)   5  (-3)  
Senses  passive  Perception  10  
Languages  --  
Challenge  0  (10  XP)  
    
Charge.  If  the  goat  moves  at  least  20  feet  straight   toward  a  target  and  then  hits  it  with  a  ram  attack  on   the  same  turn,  the  target  takes  an  extra  2  (1d4)   bludgeoning  damage.  If  the  target  is  a  creature,  it  must   succeed  on  a  DC  10  Strength  saving  throw  or  be   knocked  prone.  
Sure-Footed.  The  goat  has  advantage  on  Strength  and   Dexterity  saving  throws  made  against  effects  that   would  knock  it  prone.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

376-]  {+5.1  

381+}  

Actions  
Ram.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  3  (1d4  +  1)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Hawk  
Tiny  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13   Hit  Points  1  (1d4  -  1)   Speed  10  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      5  (-3)   16  (+3)   8  (-1)   2  (-4)   14  (+2)   6  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +4   Senses  passive  Perception  14   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)        Keen  Sight.  The  hawk  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  sight.  
Actions  
Talons.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  1  slashing  damage.     
Hunter  Shark  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  45  (6d10  +  12)   Speed  0  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   13  (+1)   15  (+2)   1  (-5)   10  (+0)   4  (-3)  
Skills  Perception  +2   Senses  blindsight  30  ft.,  passive  Perception  12   Languages  --   Challenge  2  (450  XP)        Blood  Frenzy.  The  shark  has  advantage  on  melee  attack   rolls  against  any  creature  that  doesn't  have  all  its  hit   points.   Water  Breathing.  The  shark  can  breathe  only   underwater.  

Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  13  (2d8  +  4)  piercing  damage.      Smaller  than  a  giant  shark  but  larger  and  fiercer   than  a  reef  shark,  a  hunter  shark  haunts  deep   waters.  It  usually  hunts  alone,  but  multiple  hunter   sharks  might  feed  in  the  same  area.  A  fully  grown   hunter  shark  is  15  to  20  feet  long.     
Hyena  
Medium  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  11   Hit  Points  5  (1d8  +  1)   Speed  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      11  (+0)   13  (+1)   12  (+1)   2  (-4)   12  (+1)   5  (-3)  
Skills  Perception  +3   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)        Pack  Tactics.  The  hyena  has  advantage  on  an  attack   roll  against  a  creature  if  at  least  one  of  the  hyena's   allies  is  within  5  feet  of  the  creature  and  the  ally  isn't   incapacitated.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  3  (1d6)  piercing  damage.     
Jackal  
Small  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  3  (1d6)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      8  (-1)   15  (+2)   11  (+0)   3  (-4)   12  (+1)   6  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +3   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

377-]  {+5.1  

382+}  

     Keen  Hearing  and  Smell.  The  jackal  has  advantage  on   Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  hearing  or   smell.   Pack  Tactics.  The  jackal  has  advantage  on  an  attack  roll   against  a  creature  if  at  least  one  of  the  jackal's  allies  is   within  5  feet  of  the  creature  and  the  ally  isn't   incapacitated.  
Actions   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +1  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  1  (1d4  ­  1)  piercing  damage.     
Killer  Whale  
Huge  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  90  (12d12  +  12)   Speed  0  ft.,  swim  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      19  (+4)   10  (+0)   13  (+1)   3  (-4)   12  (+1)   7  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +3   Senses  blindsight  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  3  (700  XP)        Echolocation.  The  whale  can't  use  its  blindsight  while   deafened.   Hold  Breath.  The  whale  can  hold  its  breath  for  30   minutes.   Keen  Hearing.  The  whale  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  hearing.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  21  (5d6  +  4)  piercing  damage.     
Lion  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  26  (4d10  +  4)   Speed  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      17  (+3)   15  (+2)   13  (+1)   3  (-4)   12  (+1)   8  (-1)  

Skills  Perception  +3,  Stealth  +6   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  1  (200  XP)        Keen  Smell.  The  lion  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  smell.   Pack  Tactics.  The  lion  has  advantage  on  an  attack  roll   against  a  creature  if  at  least  one  of  the  lion's  allies  is   within  5  feet  of  the  creature  and  the  ally  isn't   incapacitated.   Pounce.  If  the  lion  moves  at  least  20  feet  straight   toward  a  creature  and  then  hits  it  with  a  claw  attack  on   the  same  turn,  that  target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  13   Strength  saving  throw  or  be  knocked  prone.  If  the   target  is  prone,  the  lion  can  make  one  bite  attack   against  it  as  a  bonus  action.   Running  Leap.  With  a  10-foot  running  start,  the  lion   can  long  jump  up  to  25  feet.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (1d8  +  3)  piercing  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  6  (1d6  +  3)  slashing  damage.     
Lizard  
Tiny  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  10   Hit  Points  2  (1d4)   Speed  20  ft.,  climb  20  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      2  (-4)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)   1  (-5)   8  (-1)   3  (-4)  
Senses  darkvision  30  ft.,  passive  Perception  9   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +0  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  1  piercing  damage.     

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

378-]  {+5.1  

383+}  

Mammoth  
Huge  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  126  (11d12  +  55)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      24  (+7)   9  (-1)   21  (+5)   3  (-4)   11  (+0)   6  (-2)  
Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  6  (2,300  XP)        Trampling  Charge.  If  the  mammoth  moves  at  least  20   feet  straight  toward  a  creature  and  then  hits  it  with  a   gore  attack  on  the  same  turn,  that  target  must  succeed   on  a  DC  18  Strength  saving  throw  or  be  knocked  prone.   If  the  target  is  prone,  the  mammoth  can  make  one   stomp  attack  against  it  as  a  bonus  action.  
Actions  
Gore.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  10  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  25  (4d8  +  7)  piercing  damage.   Stomp.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +10  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  prone  creature.  Hit:  29  (4d10  +  7)  bludgeoning   damage.      A  mammoth  is  an  elephantine  creature  with  thick   fur  and  long  tusks.  Stockier  and  fiercer  than  normal   elephants,  mammoths  inhabit  a  wide  range  of  climes,   from  subarctic  to  subtropical.     
Mastiff  
Medium  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  5  (1d8  +  1)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      13  (+1)   14  (+2)   12  (+1)   3  (-4)   12  (+1)   7  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +3   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  1/8  (25  XP)       

Keen  Hearing  and  Smell.  The  mastiff  has  advantage  on   Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  hearing  or   smell.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  4  (1d6  +  1)  piercing  damage.  If  the  target  is   a  creature,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  11  Strength  saving   throw  or  be  knocked  prone.      Mastiffs  are  impressive  hounds  prized  by   humanoids  for  their  loyalty  and  keen  senses.   Mastiffs  can  be  trained  as  guard  dogs,  hunting  dogs,   and  war  dogs.  Halflings  and  other  Small  humanoids   ride  them  as  mounts.     
Mule  
Medium  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  10   Hit  Points  11  (2d8  +  2)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      14  (+2)   10  (+0)   13  (+1)   2  (-4)   10  (+0)   5  (-3)  
Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  1/8  (25  XP)        Beast  of  Burden.  The  mule  is  considered  to  be  a  Large   animal  for  the  purpose  of  determining  its  carrying   capacity.   Sure-Footed.  The  mule  has  advantage  on  Strength  and   Dexterity  saving  throws  made  against  effects  that   would  knock  it  prone.  
Actions  
Hooves.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  4  (1d4  +  2)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Octopus  
Small  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  3  (1d6)   Speed  5  ft.,  swim  30  ft.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

379-]  {+5.1  

384+}  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      4  (-3)   15  (+2)   11  (+0)   3  (-4)   10  (+0)   4  (-3)  
Skills  Perception  +2,  Stealth  +4   Senses  darkvision  30  ft.,  passive  Perception  12   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)        Hold  Breath.  While  out  of  water,  the  octopus  can  hold   its  breath  for  30  minutes.   Underwater  Camouflage.  The  octopus  has  advantage   on  Dexterity  (Stealth)  checks  made  while  underwater.   Water  Breathing.  The  octopus  can  breathe  only   underwater.  
Actions  
Tentacles.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  1  bludgeoning  damage,  and  the  target   is  grappled  (escape  DC  10).  Until  this  grapple  ends,  the   octopus  can't  use  its  tentacles  on  another  target.   Ink  Cloud  (Recharges  after  a  Short  or  Long  Rest).  A  5- foot-radius  cloud  of  ink  extends  all  around  the  octopus   if  it  is  underwater.  The  area  is  heavily  obscured  for  1   minute,  although  a  significant  current  can  disperse  the   ink.  After  releasing  the  ink,  the  octopus  can  use  the   Dash  action  as  a  bonus  action.     
Owl  
Tiny  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  11   Hit  Points  1  (1d4  -  1)   Speed  5  ft.,  fly  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      3  (-4)   13  (+1)   8  (-1)   2  (-4)   12  (+1)   7  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +3,  Stealth  +3   Senses  darkvision  120  ft.,  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)        Flyby.  The  owl  doesn't  provoke  opportunity  attacks   when  it  flies  out  of  an  enemy's  reach.   Keen  Hearing  and  Sight.  The  owl  has  advantage  on   Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  hearing  or   sight.  

Actions  
Talons.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  1  slashing  damage.     
Panther  
Medium  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  13  (3d8)   Speed  50  ft.,  climb  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      14  (+2)   15  (+2)   10  (+0)   3  (-4)   14  (+2)   7  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +4,  Stealth  +6   Senses  passive  Perception  14   Languages  --   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)        Keen  Smell.  The  panther  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  smell.   Pounce.  If  the  panther  moves  at  least  20  feet  straight   toward  a  creature  and  then  hits  it  with  a  claw  attack  on   the  same  turn,  that  target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  12   Strength  saving  throw  or  be  knocked  prone.  If  the   target  is  prone,  the  panther  can  make  one  bite  attack   against  it  as  a  bonus  action.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  4  (1d4  +  2)  slashing  damage.     
Phase  Spider  
Large  monstrosity,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  32  (5d10  +  5)   Speed  30  ft.,  climb  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   15  (+2)   12  (+1)   6  (-2)   10  (+0)   6  (-2)  
Skills  Stealth  +6   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

380-]  {+5.1  

385+}  

Challenge  3  (700  XP)  
    
Ethereal  Jaunt.  As  a  bonus  action,  the  spider  can   magically  shift  from  the  Material  Plane  to  the  Ethereal   Plane,  or  vice  versa.  
Spider  Climb.  The  spider  can  climb  difficult  surfaces,   including  upside  down  on  ceilings,  without  needing  to   make  an  ability  check.  
Web  Walker.  The  spider  ignores  movement  restrictions   caused  by  webbing.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  7  (1d10  +  2)  piercing  damage,  and  the   target  must  make  a  DC  11  Constitution  saving  throw,   taking  18  (4d8)  poison  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half   as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.  If  the  poison   damage  reduces  the  target  to  0  hit  points,  the  target  is   stable  but  poisoned  for  1  hour,  even  after  regaining  hit   points,  and  is  paralyzed  while  poisoned  in  this  way.  
   A  phase  spider  possesses  the  magical  ability  to   phase  in  and  out  of  the  Ethereal  Plane.  It  seems  to   appear  out  of  nowhere  and  quickly  vanishes  after   attacking.  Its  movement  on  the  Ethereal  Plane  before   coming  back  to  the  Material  Plane  makes  it  seem  like   it  can  teleport.     
Poisonous  Snake  
Tiny  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13  
Hit  Points  2  (1d4)  
Speed  30  ft.,  swim  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   2  (-4)   16  (+3)   11  (+0)   1  (-5)   10  (+0)   3  (-4)  
Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  passive  Perception  10  
Languages  --  
Challenge  1/8  (25  XP)  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  1  piercing  damage,  and  the  target  must   make  a  DC  10  Constitution  saving  throw,  taking  5  (2d4)   poison  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  

  
Polar  Bear  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  42  (5d10  +  15)   Speed  40  ft.,  swim  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      20  (+5)   10  (+0)   16  (+3)   2  (-4)   13  (+1)   7  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +3   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  2  (450  XP)        Keen  Smell.  The  bear  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  smell.  
Actions   Multiattack.  The  bear  makes  two  attacks:  one  with  its   bite  and  one  with  its  claws.   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  9  (1d8  +  5)  piercing  damage.   Claws.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  12  (2d6  +  5)  slashing  damage.     
Pony  
Medium  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  10   Hit  Points  11  (2d8  +  2)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   10  (+0)   13  (+1)   2  (-4)   11  (+0)   7  (-2)  
Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  1/8  (25  XP)  
Actions   Hooves.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  7  (2d4  +  2)  bludgeoning  damage.     

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

381-]  {+5.1  

386+}  

Quipper  
Tiny  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13   Hit  Points  1  (1d4  -  1)   Speed  0  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      2  (-4)   16  (+3)   9  (-1)   1  (-5)   7  (-2)   2  (-4)  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  8   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)        Blood  Frenzy.  The  quipper  has  advantage  on  melee   attack  rolls  against  any  creature  that  doesn't  have  all   its  hit  points.   Water  Breathing.  The  quipper  can  breathe  only   underwater.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  1  piercing  damage.      A  quipper  is  a  carnivorous  fish  with  sharp  teeth.   Quippers  can  adapt  to  any  aquatic  environment,   including  cold  subterranean  lakes.  They  frequently   gather  in  swarms;  the  statistics  for  a  swarm  of   quippers  appear  later  in  this  appendix.     
Rat  
Tiny  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  10   Hit  Points  1  (1d4  -  1)   Speed  20  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      2  (-4)   11  (+0)   9  (-1)   2  (-4)   10  (+0)   4  (-3)  
Senses  darkvision  30  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)        Keen  Smell.  The  rat  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  smell.  

Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +0  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  1  piercing  damage.     
Raven  
Tiny  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  1  (1d4  -  1)   Speed  10  ft.,  fly  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      2  (-4)   14  (+2)   8  (-1)   2  (-4)   12  (+1)   6  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +3   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)        Mimicry.  The  raven  can  mimic  simple  sounds  it  has   heard,  such  as  a  person  whispering,  a  baby  crying,  or   an  animal  chittering.  A  creature  that  hears  the  sounds   can  tell  they  are  imitations  with  a  successful  DC  10   Wisdom  (Insight)  check.  
Actions  
Beak.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  1  piercing  damage.     
Reef  Shark  
Medium  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  22  (4d8  +  4)   Speed  0  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      14  (+2)   13  (+1)   13  (+1)   1  (-5)   10  (+0)   4  (-3)  
Skills  Perception  +2   Senses  blindsight  30  ft.,  passive  Perception  12   Languages  --   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)        Pack  Tactics.  The  shark  has  advantage  on  an  attack  roll   against  a  creature  if  at  least  one  of  the  shark's  allies  is  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

382-]  {+5.1  

387+}  

within  5  feet  of  the  creature  and  the  ally  isn't   incapacitated.   Water  Breathing.  The  shark  can  breathe  only   underwater.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  6  (1d8  +  2)  piercing  damage.      Smaller  than  giant  sharks  and  hunter  sharks,  reef   sharks  inhabit  shallow  waters  and  coral  reefs,   gathering  in  small  packs  to  hunt.  A  full-grown   specimen  measures  6  to  10  feet  long.     
Rhinoceros  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  11  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  45  (6d10  +  12)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      21  (+5)   8  (-1)   15  (+2)   2  (-4)   12  (+1)   6  (-2)  
Senses  passive  Perception  11   Languages  --   Challenge  2  (450  XP)        Charge.  If  the  rhinoceros  moves  at  least  20  feet   straight  toward  a  target  and  then  hits  it  with  a  gore   attack  on  the  same  turn,  the  target  takes  an  extra  9   (2d8)  bludgeoning  damage.  If  the  target  is  a  creature,  it   must  succeed  on  a  DC  15  Strength  saving  throw  or  be   knocked  prone.  
Actions  
Gore.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  14  (2d8  +  5)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Riding  Horse  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  10   Hit  Points  13  (2d10  +  2)   Speed  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      16  (+3)   10  (+0)   12  (+1)   2  (-4)   11  (+0)   7  (-2)  

Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)  
Actions  
Hooves.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  8  (2d4  +  3)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Saber-Toothed  Tiger  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  52  (7d10  +  14)   Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   14  (+2)   15  (+2)   3  (-4)   12  (+1)   8  (-1)  
Skills  Perception  +3,  Stealth  +6   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  2  (450  XP)        Keen  Smell.  The  tiger  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  smell.   Pounce.  If  the  tiger  moves  at  least  20  feet  straight   toward  a  creature  and  then  hits  it  with  a  claw  attack  on   the  same  turn,  that  target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  14   Strength  saving  throw  or  be  knocked  prone.  If  the   target  is  prone,  the  tiger  can  make  one  bite  attack   against  it  as  a  bonus  action.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  10  (1d10  +  5)  piercing  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  12  (2d6  +  5)  slashing  damage.     
Scorpion  
Tiny  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  11  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  1  (1d4  -  1)   Speed  10  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      2  (-4)   11  (+0)   8  (-1)   1  (-5)   8  (-1)   2  (-4)  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

383-]  {+5.1  

388+}  

Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  passive  Perception  9   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)  
Actions  
Sting.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  1  piercing  damage,  and  the  target  must   make  a  DC  9  Constitution  saving  throw,  taking  4  (1d8)   poison  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.     
Sea  Horse  
Tiny  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  11   Hit  Points  1  (1d4  -  1)   Speed  0  ft.,  swim  20  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      1  (-5)   12  (+1)   8  (-1)   1  (-5)   10  (+0)   2  (-4)  
Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (0  XP)        Water  Breathing.  The  sea  horse  can  breathe  only   underwater.     
Spider  
Tiny  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  1  (1d4  -  1)   Speed  20  ft.,  climb  20  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      2  (-4)   14  (+2)   8  (-1)   1  (-5)   10  (+0)   2  (-4)  
Skills  Stealth  +4   Senses  darkvision  30  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)        Spider  Climb.  The  spider  can  climb  difficult  surfaces,   including  upside  down  on  ceilings,  without  needing  to   make  an  ability  check.  

Web  Sense.  While  in  contact  with  a  web,  the  spider   knows  the  exact  location  of  any  other  creature  in   contact  with  the  same  web.   Web  Walker.  The  spider  ignores  movement  restrictions   caused  by  webbing.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  1  piercing  damage,  and  the  target  must   succeed  on  a  DC  9  Constitution  saving  throw  or  take  2   (1d4)  poison  damage.     
Swarm  of  Bats  
Medium  swarm  of  Tiny  beasts,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  22  (5d8)   Speed  0  ft.,  fly  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      5  (-3)   15  (+2)   10  (+0)   2  (-4)   12  (+1)   4  (-3)  
Damage  Resistances  bludgeoning,  piercing,  slashing   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  frightened,  grappled,  
paralyzed,  petrified,  prone,  restrained,  stunned   Senses  blindsight  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  11   Languages  --   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)        Echolocation.  The  swarm  can't  use  its  blindsight  while   deafened.   Keen  Hearing.  The  swarm  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  hearing.   Swarm.  The  swarm  can  occupy  another  creature's   space  and  vice  versa,  and  the  swarm  can  move  through   any  opening  large  enough  for  a  Tiny  bat.  The  swarm   can't  regain  hit  points  or  gain  temporary  hit  points.  
Actions  
Bites.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  0  ft.,  one   creature  in  the  swarm's  space.  Hit:  5  (2d4)  piercing   damage,  or  2  (1d4)  piercing  damage  if  the  swarm  has   half  of  its  hit  points  or  fewer.     
Swarm  of  Insects  
Medium  swarm  of  Tiny  beasts,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12  (natural  armor)  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

384-]  {+5.1  

389+}  

Hit  Points  22  (5d8)   Speed  20  ft.,  climb  20  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      3  (-4)   13  (+1)   10  (+0)   1  (-5)   7  (-2)   1  (-5)  
Damage  Resistances  bludgeoning,  piercing,  slashing   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  frightened,  grappled,  
paralyzed,  petrified,  prone,  restrained,  stunned   Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  passive  Perception  8   Languages  --   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)        Swarm.  The  swarm  can  occupy  another  creature's   space  and  vice  versa,  and  the  swarm  can  move  through   any  opening  large  enough  for  a  Tiny  insect.  The  swarm   can't  regain  hit  points  or  gain  temporary  hit  points.  
Actions  
Bites.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  0  ft.,  one   target  in  the  swarm's  space.  Hit:  10  (4d4)  piercing   damage,  or  5  (2d4)  piercing  damage  if  the  swarm  has   half  of  its  hit  points  or  fewer.     
Swarm  of  Poisonous  Snakes  
Medium  swarm  of  Tiny  beasts,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  14   Hit  Points  36  (8d8)   Speed  30  ft.,  swim  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      8  (-1)   18  (+4)   11  (+0)   1  (-5)   10  (+0)   3  (-4)  
Damage  Resistances  bludgeoning,  piercing,  slashing   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  frightened,  grappled,  
paralyzed,  petrified,  prone,  restrained,  stunned   Senses  blindsight  10  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  2  (450  XP)        Swarm.  The  swarm  can  occupy  another  creature's   space  and  vice  versa,  and  the  swarm  can  move  through   any  opening  large  enough  for  a  Tiny  snake.  The  swarm   can't  regain  hit  points  or  gain  temporary  hit  points.  

Actions  
Bites.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  0  ft.,  one   creature  in  the  swarm's  space.  Hit:  7  (2d6)  piercing   damage,  or  3  (1d6)  piercing  damage  if  the  swarm  has   half  of  its  hit  points  or  fewer.  The  target  must  make  a   DC  10  Constitution  saving  throw,  taking  14  (4d6)   poison  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  
  
Swarm  of  Quippers  
Medium  swarm  of  Tiny  beasts,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13  
Hit  Points  28  (8d8  -  8)  
Speed  0  ft.,  swim  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      13  (+1)   16  (+3)   9  (-1)   1  (-5)   7  (-2)   2  (-4)  
Damage  Resistances  bludgeoning,  piercing,  slashing   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  frightened,  grappled,  
paralyzed,  petrified,  prone,  restrained,  stunned  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  8   Languages  --  
Challenge  1  (200  XP)       
Blood  Frenzy.  The  swarm  has  advantage  on  melee   attack  rolls  against  any  creature  that  doesn't  have  all   its  hit  points.  
Swarm.  The  swarm  can  occupy  another  creature's   space  and  vice  versa,  and  the  swarm  can  move  through   any  opening  large  enough  for  a  Tiny  quipper.  The   swarm  can't  regain  hit  points  or  gain  temporary  hit   points.   Water  Breathing.  The  swarm  can  breathe  only   underwater.  
Actions  
Bites.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  0  ft.,  one   creature  in  the  swarm's  space.  Hit:  14  (4d6)  piercing   damage,  or  7  (2d6)  piercing  damage  if  the  swarm  has   half  of  its  hit  points  or  fewer.     
Swarm  of  Rats  
Medium  swarm  of  Tiny  beasts,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  10  
Hit  Points  24  (7d8  -  7)  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

385-]  {+5.1  

390+}  

Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      9  (-1)   11  (+0)   9  (-1)   2  (-4)   10  (+0)   3  (-4)  
Damage  Resistances  bludgeoning,  piercing,  slashing   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  frightened,  grappled,  
paralyzed,  petrified,  prone,  restrained,  stunned   Senses  darkvision  30  ft.,  passive  Perception  10   Languages  --   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)        Keen  Smell.  The  swarm  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  smell.   Swarm.  The  swarm  can  occupy  another  creature's   space  and  vice  versa,  and  the  swarm  can  move  through   any  opening  large  enough  for  a  Tiny  rat.  The  swarm   can't  regain  hit  points  or  gain  temporary  hit  points.  
Actions  
Bites.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit,  reach  0  ft.,  one   target  in  the  swarm's  space.  Hit:  7  (2d6)  piercing   damage,  or  3  (1d6)  piercing  damage  if  the  swarm  has   half  of  its  hit  points  or  fewer.     
Swarm  of  Ravens  
Medium  swarm  of  Tiny  beasts,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12   Hit  Points  24  (7d8  -  7)   Speed  10  ft.,  fly  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      6  (-2)   14  (+2)   8  (-1)   3  (-4)   12  (+1)   6  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +5   Damage  Resistances  bludgeoning,  piercing,  slashing   Condition  Immunities  charmed,  frightened,  grappled,  
paralyzed,  petrified,  prone,  restrained,  stunned   Senses  passive  Perception  15   Languages  --   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)        Swarm.  The  swarm  can  occupy  another  creature's   space  and  vice  versa,  and  the  swarm  can  move  through   any  opening  large  enough  for  a  Tiny  raven.  The  swarm   can't  regain  hit  points  or  gain  temporary  hit  points.  

Actions  
Beaks.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target  in  the  swarm's  space.  Hit:  7  (2d6)  piercing   damage,  or  3  (1d6)  piercing  damage  if  the  swarm  has   half  of  its  hit  points  or  fewer.  
  
Variant: Insect Swarms
Different  kinds  of  insects  can  gather  in  swarms,  and  each   swarm  has  the  special  characteristics  described  below.      Swarm  of  Beetles.  A  swarm  of  beetles  gains  a  burrowing   speed  of  5  feet.      Swarm  of  Centipedes.  A  creature  reduced  to  0  hit  points   by  a  swarm  of  centipedes  is  stable  but  poisoned  for  1  hour,   even  after  regaining  hit  points,  and  paralyzed  while  poisoned   in  this  way.      Swarm  of  Spiders.  A  swarm  of  spiders  has  the  following   additional  traits.      Spider  Climb.  The  swarm  can  climb  difficult  surfaces,   including  upside  down  on  ceilings,  without  needing  to  make   an  ability  check.      Web  Sense.  While  in  contact  with  a  web,  the  swarm  knows   the  exact  location  of  any  other  creature  in  contact  with  the   same  web.      Web  Walker.  The  swarm  ignores  movement  restrictions   caused  by  webbing.      Swarm  of  Wasps.  A  swarm  of  wasps  has  a  walking  speed   of  5  feet,  a  flying  speed  of  30  feet,  and  no  climbing  speed.  
  
Tiger  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  12  
Hit  Points  37  (5d10  +  10)  
Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   17  (+3)   15  (+2)   14  (+2)   3  (-4)   12  (+1)   8  (-1)  
Skills  Perception  +3,  Stealth  +6  
Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  13  
Languages  --  
Challenge  1  (200  XP)  
    
Keen  Smell.  The  tiger  has  advantage  on  Wisdom   (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  smell.  
Pounce.  If  the  tiger  moves  at  least  20  feet  straight   toward  a  creature  and  then  hits  it  with  a  claw  attack  on   the  same  turn,  that  target  must  succeed  on  a  DC  13   Strength  saving  throw  or  be  knocked  prone.  If  the  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

386-]  {+5.1  

391+}  

target  is  prone,  the  tiger  can  make  one  bite  attack   against  it  as  a  bonus  action.  
Actions   Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  8  (1d10  +  3)  piercing  damage.   Claw.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (1d8  +  3)  slashing  damage.     
Vulture  
Medium  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  10   Hit  Points  5  (1d8  +  1)   Speed  10  ft.,  fly  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      7  (-2)   10  (+0)   13  (+1)   2  (-4)   12  (+1)   4  (-3)  
Skills  Perception  +3   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)        Keen  Sight  and  Smell.  The  vulture  has  advantage  on   Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  sight  or  smell.   Pack  Tactics.  The  vulture  has  advantage  on  an  attack   roll  against  a  creature  if  at  least  one  of  the  vulture's   allies  is  within  5  feet  of  the  creature  and  the  ally  isn't   incapacitated.  
Actions   Beak.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  2  (1d4)  piercing  damage.     
Warhorse  
Large  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  11   Hit  Points  19  (3d10  +  3)   Speed  60  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   12  (+1)   13  (+1)   2  (-4)   12  (+1)   7  (-2)  
Senses  passive  Perception  11   Languages  --   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)  

     Trampling  Charge.  If  the  horse  moves  at  least  20  feet   straight  toward  a  creature  and  then  hits  it  with  a   hooves  attack  on  the  same  turn,  that  target  must   succeed  on  a  DC  14  Strength  saving  throw  or  be   knocked  prone.  If  the  target  is  prone,  the  horse  can   make  another  attack  with  its  hooves  against  it  as  a   bonus  action.  
Actions  
Hooves.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.     
Weasel  
Tiny  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13   Hit  Points  1  (1d4  -  1)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      3  (-4)   16  (+3)   8  (-1)   2  (-4)   12  (+1)   3  (-4)  
Skills  Perception  +3,  Stealth  +5   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  --   Challenge  0  (10  XP)        Keen  Hearing  and  Smell.  The  weasel  has  advantage  on   Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  hearing  or   smell.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  1  piercing  damage.     
Winter  Wolf  
Large  monstrosity,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)   Hit  Points  75  (10d10  +  20)   Speed  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   13  (+1)   14  (+2)   7  (-2)   12  (+1)   8  (-1)  
Skills  Perception  +5,  Stealth  +3   Damage  Immunities  cold  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

387-]  {+5.1  

392+}  

Senses  passive  Perception  15  
Languages  Common,  Giant,  Winter  Wolf  
Challenge  3  (700  XP)  
    
Keen  Hearing  and  Smell.  The  wolf  has  advantage  on   Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  hearing  or   smell.  
Pack  Tactics.  The  wolf  has  advantage  on  an  attack  roll   against  a  creature  if  at  least  one  of  the  wolf's  allies  is   within  5  feet  of  the  creature  and  the  ally  isn't   incapacitated.  
Snow  Camouflage.  The  wolf  has  advantage  on   Dexterity  (Stealth)  checks  made  to  hide  in  snowy   terrain.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  11  (2d6  +  4)  piercing  damage.  If  the  target  is   a  creature,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  14  Strength  saving   throw  or  be  knocked  prone.  
Cold  Breath  (Recharge  5­6).  The  wolf  exhales  a  blast  of   freezing  wind  in  a  15-foot  cone.  Each  creature  in  that   area  must  make  a  DC  12  Dexterity  saving  throw,  taking   18  (4d8)  cold  damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much   damage  on  a  successful  one.  
   The  arctic-dwelling  winter  wolf  is  as  large  as  a  dire   wolf  but  has  snow-white  fur  and  pale  blue  eyes.   Frost  giants  use  these  evil  creatures  as  guards  and   hunting  companions,  putting  the  wolves'  deadly   breath  weapon  to  use  against  their  foes.  Winter   wolves  communicate  with  one  another  using  growls   and  barks,  but  they  speak  Common  and  Giant  well   enough  to  follow  simple  conversations.     
Wolf  
Medium  beast,  unaligned  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  11  (2d8  +  2)  
Speed  40  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   12  (+1)   15  (+2)   12  (+1)   3  (-4)   12  (+1)   6  (-2)  
Skills  Perception  +3,  Stealth  +4  
Senses  passive  Perception  13  
Languages  --  

Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)        Keen  Hearing  and  Smell.  The  wolf  has  advantage  on   Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  hearing  or   smell.  
Pack  Tactics.  The  wolf  has  advantage  on  attack  rolls   against  a  creature  if  at  least  one  of  the  wolf's  allies  is   within  5  feet  of  the  creature  and  the  ally  isn't   incapacitated.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  7  (2d4  +  2)  piercing  damage.  If  the  target  is   a  creature,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  11  Strength  saving   throw  or  be  knocked  prone.  
  
Worg  
Large  monstrosity,  neutral  evil  
Armor  Class  13  (natural  armor)  
Hit  Points  26  (4d10  +  4)   Speed  50  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   16  (+3)   13  (+1)   13  (+1)   7  (-2)   11  (+0)   8  (-1)  
Skills  Perception  +4   Senses  darkvision  60  ft.,  passive  Perception  14  
Languages  Goblin,  Worg   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)       
Keen  Hearing  and  Smell.  The  worg  has  advantage  on   Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  hearing  or   smell.  
Actions  
Bite.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  10  (2d6  +  3)  piercing  damage.  If  the  target  is   a  creature,  it  must  succeed  on  a  DC  13  Strength  saving   throw  or  be  knocked  prone.  
   A  worg  is  an  evil  predator  that  delights  in  hunting   and  devouring  creatures  weaker  than  itself.  Cunning   and  malevolent,  worgs  roam  across  the  remote   wilderness  or  are  raised  by  goblins  and  hobgoblins.   Those  creatures  use  worgs  as  mounts,  but  a  worg   will  turn  on  its  rider  if  it  feels  mistreated  or   malnourished.  Worgs  speak  in  their  own  language  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

388-]  {+5.1  

393+}  

and  Goblin,  and  a  few  learn  to  speak  Common  as   well.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

389-]  {+5.1  

394  

Appendix MM-B:+} Nonplayer Characters
   This  appendix  contains  statistics  for  various   humanoid  nonplayer  characters  (NPCs)  that   adventurers  might  encounter  during  a  campaign,   including  lowly  commoners  and  mighty  archmages.   These  stat  blocks  can  be  used  to  represent  both   human  and  nonhuman  NPCs.  
Customizing NPCs
There  are  many  easy  ways  to  customize  the  NPCs  in   this  appendix  for  your  home  campaign.      Racial  Traits.  You  can  add  racial  traits  to  an  NPC.   For  example,  a  halfling  druid  might  have  a  speed  of   25  feet  and  the  Lucky  trait.  Adding  racial  traits  to  an   NPC  doesn't  alter  its  challenge  rating.  For  more  on   racial  traits,  see  the  Player's  Handbook.      Spell  Swaps.  One  way  to  customize  an  NPC   spellcaster  is  to  replace  one  or  more  of  its  spells.  You   can  substitute  any  spell  on  the  NPC's  spell  list  with  a   different  spell  of  the  same  level  from  the  same  spell   list.  Swapping  spells  in  this  manner  doesn't  alter  an   NPC's  challenge  rating.      Armor  and  Weapon  Swaps.  You  can  upgrade  or   downgrade  an  NPC's  armor,  or  add  or  switch   weapons.  Adjustments  to  Armor  Class  and  damage   can  change  an  NPC's  challenge  rating.      Magic  Items.  The  more  powerful  an  NPC,  the   more  likely  it  has  one  or  more  magic  items  in  its   possession.  An  archmage,  for  example,  might  have  a   magic  staff  or  wand,  as  well  as  one  or  more  potions   and  scrolls.  Giving  an  NPC  a  potent  damage-dealing   magic  item  could  alter  its  challenge  rating.  
Acolyte  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  alignment  
Armor  Class  10  
Hit  Points  9  (2d8)  
Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   10  (+0)   10  (+0)   10  (+0)   10  (+0)   14  (+2)   11  (+0)  
Skills  Medicine  +4,  Religion  +2  
Senses  passive  Perception  12  

Languages  any  one  language  (usually  Common)   Challenge  1/4  (50  XP)        Spellcasting.  The  acolyte  is  a  1st-level  spellcaster.  Its   spellcasting  ability  is  Wisdom  (spell  save  DC  12,  +4  to   hit  with  spell  attacks).  The  acolyte  has  following  cleric   spells  prepared:   Cantrips  (at  will):  light,  sacred  flame,  thaumaturgy   1st  level  (3  slots):  bless,  cure  wounds,  sanctuary  
Actions  
Club.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  2  (1d4)  bludgeoning  damage.      Acolytes  are  junior  members  of  a  clergy,  usually   answerable  to  a  priest.  They  perform  a  variety  of   functions  in  a  temple  and  are  granted  minor   spellcasting  power  by  their  deities.     
Archmage  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  alignment  
Armor  Class  12  (15  with  mage  armor)   Hit  Points  99  (18d8  +  18)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      10  (+0)   14  (+2)   12  (+1)   20  (+5)   15  (+2)   16  (+3)  
Saving  Throws  Int  +9,  Wis  +6   Skills  Arcana  +13,  History  +13   Damage  Resistance  damage  from  spells;  nonmagical  
bludgeoning,  piercing,  and  slashing  (from  stoneskin)   Senses  passive  Perception  12   Languages  any  six  languages   Challenge  12  (8,400  XP)        Magic  Resistance.  The  archmage  has  advantage  on   saving  throws  against  spells  and  other  magical  effects.   Spellcasting.  The  archmage  is  an  18th-level  spellcaster.   Its  spellcasting  ability  is  Intelligence  (spell  save  DC  17,   +9  to  hit  with  spell  attacks).  The  archmage  can  cast   disguise  self  and  invisibility  at  will  and  has  the  following   wizard  spells  prepared:   Cantrips  (at  will):  fire  bolt,  light,  mage  hand,  
prestidigitation,  shocking  grasp   [-1st  level  (4  slots):  detect  magic,  identify,  mage  armor,*  
magic  missile-]  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

390-]  {+5.1  

395  

1st  level  (4  slots):  detect  magic,  identify,  mage  armor,*   magic  missile+}  
2nd  level  (3  slots):  detect  thoughts,  mirror  image,  misty   step  
3rd  level  (3  slots):  counterspell,  fly,  lightning  bolt   4th  level  (3  slots):  banishment,  fire  shield,  stoneskin*   5th  level  (3  slots):  cone  of  cold,  scrying,  wall  of  force   6th  level  (1  slot):  globe  of  invulnerability   7th  level  (1  slot):  teleport   8th  level  (1  slot):  mind  blank*   9th  level  (1  slot):  time  stop   *The  archmage  casts  these  spells  on  itself  before  
combat.  
Actions  
Dagger.  Melee  or  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,   reach  5  ft.  or  range  20/60  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  4  (1d4  +   2)  piercing  damage.      Archmages  are  powerful  (and  usually  quite  old)   spellcasters  dedicated  to  the  study  of  the  arcane  arts.   Benevolent  ones  counsel  kings  and  queens,  while   evil  ones  rule  as  tyrants  and  pursue  lichdom.  Those   who  are  neither  good  nor  evil  sequester  themselves   in  remote  towers  to  practice  their  magic  without   interruption.      An  archmage  typically  has  one  or  more  apprentice   mages,  and  an  archmage's  abode  has  numerous   magical  wards  and  guardians  to  discourage   interlopers.     
Assassin  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  non-good  alignment  
Armor  Class  15  (studded  leather)   Hit  Points  78  (12d8  +  24)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      11  (+0)   16  (+3)   14  (+2)   13  (+1)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)  
Saving  Throws  Dex  +6,  Int  +4   Skills  Acrobatics  +6,  Deception  +3,  Perception  +3,  
Stealth  +9   Damage  Resistances  poison   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  Thieves'  cant  plus  any  two  languages  

Challenge  8  (3,900  XP)  
    
Assassinate.  During  its  first  turn,  the  assassin  has   advantage  on  attack  rolls  against  any  creature  that   hasn't  taken  a  turn.  Any  hit  the  assassin  scores  against   a  surprised  creature  is  a  critical  hit.  
Evasion.  If  the  assassin  is  subjected  to  an  effect  that   allows  it  to  make  a  Dexterity  saving  throw  to  take  only   half  damage,  the  assassin  instead  takes  no  damage  if  it   succeeds  on  the  saving  throw,  and  only  half  damage  if   it  fails.  
Sneak  Attack.  Once  per  turn,  the  assassin  deals  an   extra  14  (4d6)  damage  when  it  hits  a  target  with  a   weapon  attack  and  has  advantage  on  the  attack  roll,  or   when  the  target  is  within  5  feet  of  an  ally  of  the   assassin  that  isn't  incapacitated  and  the  assassin   doesn't  have  disadvantage  on  the  attack  roll.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  assassin  makes  two  shortsword   attacks.  
Shortsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  6  (1d6  +  3)  piercing  damage,  and   the  target  must  make  a  DC  15  Constitution  saving   throw,  taking  24  (7d6)  poison  damage  on  a  failed  save,   or  half  as  much  damage  on  a  successful  one.  
Light  Crossbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +6  to  hit,   range  80/320  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  7  (1d8  +  3)  piercing   damage,  and  the  target  must  make  a  DC  15   Constitution  saving  throw,  taking  24  (7d6)  poison   damage  on  a  failed  save,  or  half  as  much  damage  on  a   successful  one.  
   Trained  in  the  use  of  poison,  assassins  are   remorseless  killers  who  work  for  nobles,   guildmasters,  sovereigns,  and  anyone  else  who  can   afford  them.     
Bandit  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  non-lawful   alignment  
Armor  Class  12  (leather  armor)  
Hit  Points  11  (2d8  +  2)  
Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   11  (+0)   12  (+1)   12  (+1)   10  (+0)   10  (+0)   10  (+0)  
[-Senses  passive  Perception  10  
Languages  any  one  language  (usually  Common)-]  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

391-]  {+5.1  

396  

Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  any  one  language  (usually  Common)+}   Challenge  1/8  (25  XP)  
Actions  
Scimitar.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  4  (1d6  +  1)  slashing  damage.   Light  Crossbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,   range  80  ft./320  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d8  +  1)  piercing   damage.      Bandits  rove  in  gangs  and  are  sometimes  led  by   thugs,  veterans,  or  spellcasters.  Not  all  bandits  are   evil.  Oppression,  drought,  disease,  or  famine  can   often  drive  otherwise  honest  folk  to  a  life  of  banditry.      Pirates  are  bandits  of  the  high  seas.  They  might  be   freebooters  interested  only  in  treasure  and  murder,   or  they  might  be  privateers  sanctioned  by  the  crown   to  attack  and  plunder  an  enemy  nation's  vessels.     
Bandit  Captain  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  non-lawful   alignment  
Armor  Class  15  (studded  leather)   Hit  Points  65  (10d8  +  20)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   16  (+3)   14  (+2)   14  (+2)   11  (+0)   14  (+2)  
Saving  Throws  Str  +4,  Dex  +5,  Wis  +2   Skills  Athletics  +4,  Deception  +4   Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  any  two  languages   Challenge  2  (450  XP)  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  captain  makes  three  melee  attacks:   two  with  its  scimitar  and  one  with  its  dagger.  Or  the   captain  makes  two  ranged  attacks  with  its  daggers.   Scimitar.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  6  (1d6  +  3)  slashing  damage.   Dagger.  Melee  or  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,   reach  5  ft.  or  range  20/60  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d4  +   3)  piercing  damage.  

Reactions  
Parry.  The  captain  adds  2  to  its  AC  against  one  melee   attack  that  would  hit  it.  To  do  so,  the  captain  must  see   the  attacker  and  be  wielding  a  melee  weapon.  
   It  takes  a  strong  personality,  ruthless  cunning,  and  a   silver  tongue  to  keep  a  gang  of  bandits  in  line.  The   bandit  captain  has  these  qualities  in  spades.      In  addition  to  managing  a  crew  of  selfish   malcontents,  the  pirate  captain  is  a  variation  of  the   bandit  captain,  with  a  ship  to  protect  and  command.   To  keep  the  crew  in  line,  the  captain  must  mete  out   rewards  and  punishment  on  a  regular  basis.      More  than  treasure,  a  bandit  captain  or  pirate   captain  craves  infamy.  A  prisoner  who  appeals  to  the   captain's  vanity  or  ego  is  more  likely  to  be  treated   fairly  than  a  prisoner  who  does  not  or  claims  not  to   know  anything  of  the  captain's  colorful  reputation.     
Berserker  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  chaotic  alignment  
Armor  Class  13  (hide  armor)  
Hit  Points  67  (9d8  +  27)  
Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   16  (+3)   12  (+1)   17  (+3)   9  (-1)   11  (+0)   9  (-1)  
Senses  passive  Perception  10  
Languages  any  one  language  (usually  Common)  
Challenge  2  (450  XP)  
    
Reckless.  At  the  start  of  its  turn,  the  berserker  can  gain   advantage  on  all  melee  weapon  attack  rolls  during  that   turn,  but  attack  rolls  against  it  have  advantage  until  the   start  of  its  next  turn.  
Actions  
Greataxe.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  9  (1d12  +  3)  slashing  damage.  
   Hailing  from  uncivilized  lands,  unpredictable   berserkers  come  together  in  war  parties  and  seek   conflict  wherever  they  can  find  it.     

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

392-]  {+5.1  

397+}  

Commoner  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  alignment  
Armor  Class  10   Hit  Points  4  (1d8)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      10  (+0)   10  (+0)   10  (+0)   10  (+0)   10  (+0)   10  (+0)  
Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  any  one  language  (usually  Common)   Challenge  0  (10  XP)  
Actions  
Club.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  2  (1d4)  bludgeoning  damage.      Commoners  include  peasants,  serfs,  slaves,  servants,   pilgrims,  merchants,  artisans,  and  hermits.     
Cultist  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  non-good  alignment  
Armor  Class  12  (leather  armor)   Hit  Points  9  (2d8)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      11  (+0)   12  (+1)   10  (+0)   10  (+0)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)  
Skills  Deception  +2,  Religion  +2   Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  any  one  language  (usually  Common)   Challenge  1/8  (25  XP)      Dark  Devotion.  The  cultist  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  being  charmed  or  frightened.  
Actions  
Scimitar.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  creature.  Hit:  4  (1d6  +  1)  slashing  damage.      Cultists  swear  allegiance  to  dark  powers  such  as   elemental  princes,  demon  lords,  or  archdevils.  Most   conceal  their  loyalties  to  avoid  being  ostracized,   imprisoned,  or  executed  for  their  beliefs.  Unlike  evil  

acolytes,  cultists  often  show  signs  of  insanity  in  their   beliefs  and  practices.     
Cult  Fanatic  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  non-good  alignment  
Armor  Class  13  (leather  armor)   Hit  Points  33  (6d8  +  6)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      11  (+0)   14  (+2)   12  (+1)   10  (+0)   13  (+1)   14  (+2)  
Skills  Deception  +4,  Persuasion  +4,  Religion  +2   Senses  passive  Perception  11   Languages  any  one  language  (usually  Common)   Challenge  2  (450  XP)      Dark  Devotion.  The  fanatic  has  advantage  on  saving   throws  against  being  charmed  or  frightened.   Spellcasting.  The  fanatic  is  a  4th-level  spellcaster.  Its   spellcasting  ability  is  Wisdom  (spell  save  DC  11,  +3  to   hit  with  spell  attacks).  The  fanatic  has  the  following   cleric  spells  prepared:   Cantrips  (at  will):  light,  sacred  flame,  thaumaturgy   1st  level  (4  slots):  command,  inflict  wounds,  shield  of  
faith   2nd  level  (3  slots):  hold  person,  spiritual  weapon  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  fanatic  makes  two  melee  attacks.   Dagger.  Melee  or  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,   reach  5  ft.  or  range  20/60  ft.,  one  creature.  Hit:  4  (1d4   +  2)  piercing  damage.      Fanatics  are  often  part  of  a  cult's  leadership,  using   their  charisma  and  dogma  to  influence  and  prey  on   those  of  weak  will.  Most  are  interested  in  personal   power  above  all  else.     
Druid  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  alignment  
Armor  Class  11  (16  with  barkskin)   Hit  Points  27  (5d8  +  5)   Speed  30  ft.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

393-]  {+5.1  

398+}  

   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      10  (+0)   12  (+1)   13  (+1)   12  (+1)   15  (+2)   11  (+0)  
Skills  Medicine  +4,  Nature  +3,  Perception  +4   Senses  passive  Perception  14   Languages  Druidic  plus  any  two  languages   Challenge  2  (450  XP)      Spellcasting.  The  druid  is  a  4th-level  spellcaster.  Its   spellcasting  ability  is  Wisdom  (spell  save  DC  12,  +4  to   hit  with  spell  attacks).  It  has  the  following  druid  spells   prepared:   Cantrips  (at  will):  druidcraft,  produce  flame,  shillelagh   1st  level  (4  slots):  entangle,  longstrider,  speak  with  
animals,  thunderwave   2nd  level  (3  slots):  animal  messenger,  barkskin  
Actions  
Quarterstaff.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit  (+4  to  hit   with  shillelagh),  reach  5  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  3  (1d6)   bludgeoning  damage,  4  (1d8)  bludgeoning  damage  if   wielded  with  two  hands,  or  6  (1d8  +  2)  bludgeoning   damage  with  shillelagh.      Druids  dwell  in  forests  and  other  secluded   wilderness  locations,  where  they  protect  the  natural   world  from  monsters  and  the  encroachment  of   civilization.  Some  are  tribal  shamans  who  heal  the   sick,  pray  to  animal  spirits,  and  provide  spiritual   guidance.     
Gladiator  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  alignment  
Armor  Class  16  (studded  leather,  shield)   Hit  Points  112  (15d8  +  45)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      18  (+4)   15  (+2)   16  (+3)   10  (+0)   12  (+1)   15  (+2)  
Saving  Throws  Str  +7,  Dex  +5,  Con  +6   Skills  Athletics  +10,  Intimidation  +5   Senses  passive  Perception  11   Languages  any  one  language  (usually  Common)   Challenge  5  (1,800  XP)       

Brave.  The  gladiator  has  advantage  on  saving  throws   against  being  frightened.   Brute.  A  melee  weapon  deals  one  extra  die  of  its   damage  when  the  gladiator  hits  with  it  (included  in  the   attack).  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  gladiator  makes  three  melee  attacks   or  two  ranged  attacks.   Spear.  Melee  or  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,   reach  5  ft.  and  range  20/60  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  11  (2d6   +  4)  piercing  damage,  or  13  (2d8  +  4)  piercing  damage   if  used  with  two  hands  to  make  a  melee  attack.   Shield  Bash.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +7  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  creature.  Hit:  9  (2d4  +  4)  bludgeoning  damage.   If  the  target  is  a  Medium  or  smaller  creature,  it  must   succeed  on  a  DC  15  Strength  saving  throw  or  be   knocked  prone.  
Reactions  
Parry.  The  gladiator  adds  3  to  its  AC  against  one  melee   attack  that  would  hit  it.  To  do  so,  the  gladiator  must   see  the  attacker  and  be  wielding  a  melee  weapon.      Gladiators  battle  for  the  entertainment  of  raucous   crowds.  Some  gladiators  are  brutal  pit  fighters  who   treat  each  match  as  a  life-or-death  struggle,  while   others  are  professional  duelists  who  command  huge   fees  but  rarely  fight  to  the  death.     
Guard  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  alignment  
Armor  Class  16  (chain  shirt,  shield)   Hit  Points  11  (2d8  +  2)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      13  (+1)   12  (+1)   12  (+1)   10  (+0)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)  
Skills  Perception  +2   Senses  passive  Perception  12   Languages  any  one  language  (usually  Common)   Challenge  1/8  (25  XP)  
Actions  
Spear.  Melee  or  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,   reach  5  ft.  or  range  20/60  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  4  (1d6  +  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

394-]  {+5.1  

399+}  

1)  piercing  damage,  or  5  (1d8  +  1)  piercing  damage  if   used  with  two  hands  to  make  a  melee  attack.  
   Guards  include  members  of  a  city  watch,  sentries  in   a  citadel  or  fortified  town,  and  the  bodyguards  of   merchants  and  nobles.     
Knight  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  alignment  
Armor  Class  18  (plate)  
Hit  Points  52  (8d8  +  16)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   16  (+3)   11  (+0)   14  (+2)   11  (+0)   11  (+0)   15  (+2)  
Saving  Throws  Con  +4,  Wis  +2   Senses  passive  Perception  10  
Languages  any  one  language  (usually  Common)   Challenge  3  (700  XP)     
Brave.  The  knight  has  advantage  on  saving  throws   against  being  frightened.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  knight  makes  two  melee  attacks.  
Greatsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  10  (2d6  +  3)  slashing  damage.  
Heavy  Crossbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit,   range  100/400  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d10)  piercing   damage.   Leadership  (Recharges  after  a  Short  or  Long  Rest).  For   1  minute,  the  knight  can  utter  a  special  command  or   warning  whenever  a  nonhostile  creature  that  it  can  see   within  30  feet  of  it  makes  an  attack  roll  or  a  saving   throw.  The  creature  can  add  a  d4  to  its  roll  provided  it   can  hear  and  understand  the  knight.  A  creature  can   benefit  from  only  one  Leadership  die  at  a  time.  This   effect  ends  if  the  knight  is  incapacitated.  
Reactions  
Parry.  The  knight  adds  2  to  its  AC  against  one  melee   attack  that  would  hit  it.  To  do  so,  the  knight  must  see   the  attacker  and  be  wielding  a  melee  weapon.  
   Knights  are  warriors  who  pledge  service  to  rulers,   religious  orders,  and  noble  causes.  A  knight's  

alignment  determines  the  extent  to  which  a  pledge  is   honored.  Whether  undertaking  a  quest  or  patrolling   a  realm,  a  knight  often  travels  with  an  entourage   that  includes  squires  and  hirelings  who  are   commoners.     
Mage  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  alignment  
Armor  Class  12  (15  with  mage  armor)   Hit  Points  40  (9d8)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      9  (-1)   14  (+2)   11  (+0)   17  (+3)   12  (+1)   11  (+0)  
Saving  Throws  Int  +6,  Wis  +4   Skills  Arcana  +6,  History  +6   Senses  passive  Perception  11   Languages  any  four  languages   Challenge  6  (2,300  XP)        Spellcasting.  The  mage  is  a  9th-level  spellcaster.  Its   spellcasting  ability  is  Intelligence  (spell  save  DC  14,  +6   to  hit  with  spell  attacks).  The  mage  has  the  following   wizard  spells  prepared:   Cantrips  (at  will):  fire  bolt,  light,  mage  hand,  
prestidigitation   1st  level  (4  slots):  detect  magic,  mage  armor,  magic  
missile,  shield   2nd  level  (3  slots):  misty  step,  suggestion   3rd  level  (3  slots):  counterspell,  fireball,  fly   4th  level  (3  slots):  greater  invisibility,  ice  storm   5th  level  (1  slot):  cone  of  cold  
Actions  
Dagger.  Melee  or  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,   reach  5  ft.  or  range  20/60  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  4  (1d4  +   2)  piercing  damage.      Mages  spend  their  lives  in  the  study  and  practice  of   magic.  Good-aligned  mages  offer  counsel  to  nobles   and  others  in  power,  while  evil  mages  dwell  in   isolated  sites  to  perform  unspeakable  experiments   without  interference.     

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

395-]  {+5.1  

400+}  

Noble  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  alignment  
Armor  Class  15  (breastplate)   Hit  Points  9  (2d8)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      11  (+0)   12  (+1)   11  (+0)   12  (+1)   14  (+2)   16  (+3)  
Skills  Deception  +5,  Insight  +4,  Persuasion  +5   Senses  passive  Perception  12   Languages  any  two  languages   Challenge  1/8  (25  XP)  
Actions  
Rapier.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d8  +  1)  piercing  damage.  
Reactions  
Parry.  The  noble  adds  2  to  its  AC  against  one  melee   attack  that  would  hit  it.  To  do  so,  the  noble  must  see   the  attacker  and  be  wielding  a  melee  weapon.      Nobles  wield  great  authority  and  influence  as   members  of  the  upper  class,  possessing  wealth  and   connections  that  can  make  them  as  powerful  as   monarchs  and  generals.  A  noble  often  travels  in  the   company  of  guards,  as  well  as  servants  who  are   commoners.      The  noble's  statistics  can  also  be  used  to  represent   courtiers  who  aren't  of  noble  birth.     
Priest  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  alignment  
Armor  Class  13  (chain  shirt)   Hit  Points  27  (5d8  +  5)   Speed  25  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      10  (+0)   10  (+0)   12  (+1)   13  (+1)   16  (+3)   13  (+1)  
Skills  Medicine  +7,  Persuasion  +3,  Religion  +4   Senses  passive  Perception  13   Languages  any  two  languages   Challenge  2  (450  XP)       

Divine  Eminence.  As  a  bonus  action,  the  priest  can   expend  a  spell  slot  to  cause  its  melee  weapon  attacks   to  magically  deal  an  extra  10  (3d6)  radiant  damage  to  a   target  on  a  hit.  This  benefit  lasts  until  the  end  of  the   turn.  If  the  priest  expends  a  spell  slot  of  2nd  level  or   higher,  the  extra  damage  increases  by  1d6  for  each   level  above  1st.  
Spellcasting.  The  priest  is  a  5th-level  spellcaster.  Its   spellcasting  ability  is  Wisdom  (spell  save  DC  13,  +5  to   hit  with  spell  attacks).  The  priest  has  the  following   cleric  spells  prepared:  
Cantrips  (at  will):  light,  sacred  flame,  thaumaturgy  
1st  level  (4  slots):  cure  wounds,  guiding  bolt,  sanctuary  
2nd  level  (3  slots):  lesser  restoration,  spiritual  weapon  
3rd  level  (2  slots):  dispel  magic,  spirit  guardians  
Actions  
Mace.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   target.  Hit:  3  (1d6)  bludgeoning  damage.  
   Priests  bring  the  teachings  of  their  gods  to  the   common  folk.  They  are  the  spiritual  leaders  of   temples  and  shrines  and  often  hold  positions  of   influence  in  their  communities.  Evil  priests  might   work  openly  under  a  tyrant,  or  they  might  be  the   leaders  of  religious  sects  hidden  in  the  shadows  of   good  society,  overseeing  depraved  rites.      A  priest  typically  has  one  or  more  acolytes  to  help   with  religious  ceremonies  and  other  sacred  duties.     
Scout  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  alignment  
Armor  Class  13  (leather  armor)  
Hit  Points  16  (3d8  +  3)  
Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   11  (+0)   14  (+2)   12  (+1)   11  (+0)   13  (+1)   11  (+0)  
Skills  Nature  +4,  Perception  +5,  Stealth  +6,  Survival  +5  
Senses  passive  Perception  15  
Languages  any  one  language  (usually  Common)  
Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)  
  
Keen  Hearing  and  Sight.  The  scout  has  advantage  on   Wisdom  (Perception)  checks  that  rely  on  hearing  or   sight.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

396-]  {+5.1  

401+}  

Actions  
Multiattack.  The  scout  makes  two  melee  attacks  or   two  ranged  attacks.   Shortsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing  damage.  
Longbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  ranged   150/600  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  6  (1d8  +  2)  piercing   damage.  
   Scouts  are  skilled  hunters  and  trackers  who  offer   their  services  for  a  fee.  Most  hunt  wild  game,  but  a   few  work  as  bounty  hunters,  serve  as  guides,  or   provide  military  reconnaissance.     
Spy  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  alignment  
Armor  Class  12  
Hit  Points  27  (6d8)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA  
   10  (+0)   15  (+2)   10  (+0)   12  (+1)   14  (+2)   16  (+3)  
Skills  Deception  +5,  Insight  +4,  Investigation  +5,   Perception  +6,  Persuasion  +5,  Sleight  of  Hand  +4,   Stealth  +4  
Senses  passive  Perception  16   Languages  any  two  languages  
Challenge  1  (200  XP)        Cunning  Action.  On  each  of  its  turns,  the  spy  can  use  a   bonus  action  to  take  the  Dash,  Disengage,  or  Hide   action.  
Sneak  Attack  (1/Turn).  The  spy  deals  an  extra  7  (2d6)   damage  when  it  hits  a  target  with  a  weapon  attack  and   has  advantage  on  the  attack  roll,  or  when  the  target  is   within  5  feet  of  an  ally  of  the  spy  that  isn't   incapacitated  and  the  spy  doesn't  have  disadvantage   on  the  attack  roll.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  spy  makes  two  melee  attacks.  
Shortsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing  damage.  

Hand  Crossbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,   range  30/120  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  piercing   damage.      Rulers,  nobles,  merchants,  guildmasters,  and  other   wealthy  individuals  use  spies  to  gain  the  upper  hand   in  a  world  of  cutthroat  politics.  A  spy  is  trained  to   secretly  gather  information.  Loyal  spies  would   rather  die  than  divulge  information  that  could   compromise  them  or  their  employers.     
Thug  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  non-good  alignment  
Armor  Class  11  (leather  armor)   Hit  Points  32  (5d8  +  10)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      15  (+2)   11  (+0)   14  (+2)   10  (+0)   10  (+0)   11  (+0)  
Skills  Intimidation  +2   Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  any  one  language  (usually  Common)   Challenge  1/2  (100  XP)        Pack  Tactics.  The  thug  has  advantage  on  an  attack  roll   against  a  creature  if  at  least  one  of  the  thug's  allies  is   within  5  feet  of  the  creature  and  the  ally  isn't   incapacitated.  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  thug  makes  two  melee  attacks.   Mace.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +4  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,  one   creature.  Hit:  5  (1d6  +  2)  bludgeoning  damage.   Heavy  Crossbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +2  to  hit,   range  100/400  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  5  (1d10)  piercing   damage.      Thugs  are  ruthless  enforcers  skilled  at  intimidation   and  violence.  They  work  for  money  and  have  few   scruples.     
Tribal  Warrior  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  alignment  
Armor  Class  12  (hide  armor)   Hit  Points  11  (2d8  +  2)  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

397-]  {+5.1  

402+}  

Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      13  (+1)   11  (+0)   12  (+1)   8  (-1)   11  (+0)   8  (-1)  
Senses  passive  Perception  10   Languages  any  one  language   Challenge  1/8  (25  XP)        Pack  Tactics.  The  warrior  has  advantage  on  an  attack   roll  against  a  creature  if  at  least  one  of  the  warrior's   allies  is  within  5  feet  of  the  creature  and  the  ally  isn't   incapacitated.  
Actions  
Spear.  Melee  or  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,   reach  5  ft.  or  range  20/60  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  4  (1d6  +   1)  piercing  damage,  or  5  (1d8  +  1)  piercing  damage  if   used  with  two  hands  to  make  a  melee  attack.      Tribal  warriors  live  beyond  civilization,  most  often   subsisting  on  fishing  and  hunting.  Each  tribe  acts  in   accordance  with  the  wishes  of  its  chief,  who  is  the   greatest  or  oldest  warrior  of  the  tribe  or  a  tribe   member  blessed  by  the  gods.     
Veteran  
Medium  humanoid  (any  race),  any  alignment  
Armor  Class  17  (splint)   Hit  Points  58  (9d8  +  18)   Speed  30  ft.  
   STR   DEX   CON   INT   WIS   CHA      16  (+3)   13  (+1)   14  (+2)   10  (+0)   11  (+0)   10  (+0)  
Skills  Athletics  +5,  Perception  +2   Senses  passive  Perception  12   Languages  any  one  language  (usually  Common)   Challenge  3  (700  XP)  
Actions  
Multiattack.  The  veteran  makes  two  longsword  attacks.   If  it  has  a  shortsword  drawn,  it  can  also  make  a   shortsword  attack.   Longsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5  ft.,   one  target.  Hit:  7  (1d8  +  3)  slashing  damage,  or  8  (1d10   +  3)  slashing  damage  if  used  with  two  hands.  

Shortsword.  Melee  Weapon  Attack:  +5  to  hit,  reach  5   ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  6  (1d6  +  3)  piercing  damage.  
Heavy  Crossbow.  Ranged  Weapon  Attack:  +3  to  hit,   range  100/400  ft.,  one  target.  Hit:  6  (1d10  +  1)  piercing   damage.  
   Veterans  are  professional  fighters  that  take  up  arms   for  pay  or  to  protect  something  they  believe  in  or   value.  Their  ranks  include  soldiers  retired  from  long   service  and  warriors  who  never  served  anyone  but   themselves.  

Not  for  resale.  Permission  granted  to  print  or  photocopy  this  document  for  personal  use  only.     System  Reference  Document  [-5.0  

398-]  {+5.1  

403+}  

